Good evening.
It is Tuesday, February 10,
and I call this meeting
of the South Portland City Council to order.
May I have a motion to adjourn to executive session?
I'm here. So moved by Counselor Coleman.
May I have a second? So moved by Counselor Matthews.
All in favor? Yes. We have a quorum. Thank you very much.
And we'll do roll call and then we will come on down. Great.
Like Moses from the mountain. Perfect.
And I'm that happy Note,
Ladies And gentlemen,
and all creatures under this sky.
I call this meeting of the city council
to order on February 10th, 2026.
Please stand if you wish to, to allegiance to the republic
that is the United States.
I pledge allegiance
To flag of the United States of America
and to the republic for which it stands.
One nation under God, indivisible, with liberty
and justice for all.
Mr. City Manager, can we have a roll call?
Councilor Matthews, sir. Councilor West? Yes.
Councillor Pride. Here. Mayor Tipton?
Here. Councillor Coleman? Here. Councillor Walker.
Here. Councillor Scott? Yes.
Thank you. We have a quorum
and now we'll join our school board members.
You would like to be able to
Right up the podium? Yep.
Podium? Yep. Okay. I make sure we hook you up.
Okay. I'm sorry.
No, I'm trying to dis should we have all this?
Well, do you want sit?
Thank you. I
Better say.
Yeah, it's just the HT MI,
unless you know what, I can use George's laptop.
Okay, terrific. Thank you.
I might,
some of it's resilience,
you know where to find me.
Look at that. Great.
I think you'll,
it's so great.
So Mayor Waffle folks are setting up.
Um, I'll just do a quick introduction, uh, on this issue.
Yeah. And let me just go first, I just wanted to, um,
take one minute to say that unlike a council
business meeting, when we have a workshop, the um,
public comment is limited to our workshop topics.
So tonight our workshops are budget guidance
with the school board.
So comment on items having to do
with the school's budget are appropriate.
And then our second workshop discuss is the climate
resilience overlay zone.
That's going to be presented to us by our planning staff.
So if you have comments that would be appropriate to
resilience planning, um, that also will be heard
for public comment tonight.
But those are the limitations, those two. Okay.
Wouldn't I come back
to complain about the public chargers?
I don't have any interest next week.
I, well, I have two options for you.
Um, our next meeting is a regular business meeting, so
that's the 17th.
We'll have open public comment
and also council emails are red.
We are getting a lot of them, but they are definitely Red
17th. I'll do that.
Thank you. Thank you so much. I
appreciate thanks. Sorry. Thank you Scott.
So, uh, so each year, uh, council holds a joint meeting
with the school board to discuss, uh, expectations
for the upcoming budget year.
Um, councils are generally asked what, if any sort
of tax increase, uh, as I always say unfairly, uh,
would you be willing to recommend so
that the superintendent school board for the school share
with the budget and myself
and the finance director for, um, the city's portion
of the budget budget have some guidance as to what
to, to come back with?
Because certainly, uh, as we know right now,
when we start the budget year,
the requests from departments, um, are
right now would result in a tax increase
that isn't, uh, acceptable.
And so some guidance is often helpful.
Um, so tonight we're gonna hear both from the city's finance
director to kind of have a, a bigger picture overview
of some of the city, um, financial, uh, issues
and things that we'll be facing.
And then you'll hear, uh, from school officials about, um,
their portion of the budget.
Ultimately we will be looking for that guidance.
Um, in addition,
I've asked some additional questions this year to help, uh,
that are related to the, to the guidance that you'll give.
But, um, these are three questions
that will help at least me when I'm crafting, um,
the recommended city budget for you all.
The first one is, are you open
to new position requests from departments and
or existing positions, um,
that are being requested to be upgraded?
Um, so yes, no, there's some that might be covered
by non-property tax revenue.
So there's no impact, you know, to, to tiff
or to the property taxes.
Uh, some guidance there would be helpful.
Are you open to new program requests from departments?
Again, similar thing, yes. No.
Or only if covered by other, uh, tax revenues.
Uh, and then of course, is there a maximum tax rate increase
councils comfortable with?
And, um, you know, if the city can achieve that.
Um, are there specific services you wish
to see reduced if necessary to receive that target to,
to achieve that target increase?
So those are the kind of the questions
that I hope you have stirring in your heads when, um, uh,
when it comes time for council
to provide guidance, uh, for us.
So with that, uh, we'll have, uh, Ellen,
I don't know if you wanna go to lectern if you're
comfortable just presenting right here
'cause you don't have slides, uh, just to
Share. No, I don't have slides
and
everybody's facing the wrong direction. So
Yeah, there you go. I'll stay here.
So you can all see, um, there's a memo
that's in the council packet that I'm just gonna run
through some highlights on.
And then if you guys have any questions, um,
we can certainly go through that.
So every year I put this together to just sort
of highlight some of the challenges that we see
or some of the elements
that might affect the budget in the next year.
Um, they're pretty much in similar order.
So wages and benefits obviously as big for both us
and the school, but on our side, um,
we have some significant increase in health insurance
that I'm sure everybody's experiencing, which is about 10%.
And then of course our benefits that are wage dependent,
meaning a percentage of wages will go up
according to what the wages go up.
So that's pretty standard every year.
Um, you've also, um,
been giving guidance on some negotiations recently,
and I think you're aware of what those
increases might be on the wage side.
So you can translate that into, um,
a similar benefits increase for things like pension
and social security and those types of things.
Mm-hmm. Um, utilities and fuel are, gasoline
and diesel prices are good through September of 27.
Um, so we should be good through next year.
They're actually lower than they were the previous year.
Um, and so those are not expected
to be an issue for us at all.
The cost of electricity, as everybody knows, is um,
gone up in January and even though we have solar credits,
we're still subject to electricity costs that fluctuate.
So I like to say that we're, we're not spending as much
as we would be if we didn't have solar credits,
but it does mean that we still have an increase in
electricity, um, if the rates go up.
Um, water rates, uh, I've got some statistics in here.
So 6.8% for this calendar year was the water rate increase.
Um, sewer rates as a council may recall is set by us,
so, or by the council.
Um, you'll be seeing that when we go through our workshops,
um, when water resources comes in
and presents their budget as to
what those rates might be for next year.
Um, obviously the capital projects that you're aware of,
Pearl Street and the dewatering that we're gonna be
financing, we'll impact those rates
and we'll get some more information
on that in a month or so.
Probably. Um, supplies
and materials, uh,
things have settled down a lot from a couple of years ago.
We still are subject to any tariff situations
or things that impact either construction or materials
and supplies that we buy all the time.
Um, solid waste, you're gonna see in the budget
of some pretty significant increases next year.
Recycling the eco main rates, um,
they're in public work's budget
and we'll be looking at those
as we do those workshops with you.
The risk and liability insurance,
we've estimated about a 6.2% premium increase.
Workers' comp about 5%
and of course workers' comp has a wage related impact
as well as wages change.
Uh, general assistance is flat, is expenditure.
Budgets I think are expected to go up.
Things are pretty normal activity wise.
Um, and just as a reminder, the city pays 30%
of the GA costs and, uh,
we get reimbursed 70% from the state for the rest of it.
So the county tax budget they are now on
or remind you a ca uh, fiscal year that we are on.
They used to be on a calendar year.
So we had better information at this point as to
what the actual amount was gonna be
based on the website I looked at last week.
Um, the manager's budget, there's a 9.6
increase in their expenditure budget net.
How that translates to us will come back through, um,
the valuation because our allocation of
that is based on state equalized value
and they don't have that information out yet.
Um, so I've put that in as an increase for a starter
and as we go a little further
and they get their budget perfected,
we'll we'll know what our increase is.
Um, Metro has is on a calendar year,
so we know what that amount is.
That's up $29,000 or 4.2%.
Then this year, uh, revenues, so
building fees and permits, one of our bigger revenue
streams is pretty stable, has not expected
to increase a lot in m and o.
A big project comes and we got a big building permit
and we got a, we got a windfall,
but general, I think general activity is
that it's pretty flat.
Um, auto excise again
brought in 1.7 million last year more than we budgeted
and I'm still surprised.
So I have seen it's starting to settle down a little bit.
I don't know if everybody in the last two
or three years is buying cars that you couldn't buy
during the pandemic and there was a pent up demand
and maybe that's starting to flatten out,
but I am always hesitant to
increase that estimate much higher.
I have increased it the past couple
of years, but that's a lot.
And pretty surprising. We do do a significant amount
of fleet registration, so enterprise car car rentals.
Um, there's some fleets of trucks like industries
that have fleets of trucks
that come in and register with us.
And I will say the rental car companies have been
catching up with purchasing their cars over
the past couple three years.
'cause they buy 'em in groups, you know,
and they only keep 'em on the road two years, maybe three,
and then they cycle 'em out and they buy new ones.
So that's been a lot of business for us over the past two
or three years and it's contributing, I think, a lot to
that, um, over collection,
but it's good money and we'll take it.
Um, state revenue sharing.
I didn't look today, but I kept looking last week every day
and they haven't put out projections yet, so I don't know
what that's gonna look like.
And just a reminder that our ARPA funds that we had,
we had two positions in the budget
that we had been funding half
with those over the past few years,
which is the purchasing agent
and the communications officer.
Um, those funds have to be spent by the end
of this calendar year and we have, we have depleted them
for FY 27.
So those 50% will come on the tax rate, um, in the budget
that we're gonna present fund balance.
So everybody always wants
to know where we are with fund balance.
So just a reminder in here
that the policy we have is a threshold minimum of 9%, um,
of the following year's.
Expenditure budgets and a maximum so
to speak, of 12%.
And anything over that we use for CIP
or one time expenditures
or other things that the council may want to do.
Um, FY 25, which you saw last week, the audit, um,
shows the amount available in excess to be about eight
and a half million for the city.
A portion can be used to fund the CIP primary contributor is
a lot of the excess revenue that I was talking about.
Parks and rec, also recreation fees have been
crazy the last couple years.
Um, so it's more of a revenue situation.
We have had turnover still, so there's wage savings
that we've had that's contributed to that as well.
Um, the calculation is based on the
subsequent year's expenditure budget.
So as a budget increases the amount that you have to retain
to meet that nine to 12% also goes up.
So preliminary information for FY 27 school budget,
which you're gonna hear about anyway,
indicates they may have a
significant increase in their expenditures.
So we'll need to be considering that.
And the amount that we're gonna have to set aside to meet
that nine to 12% because it includes both the city
and school general fund budgets making that calculation.
So if they have a large increase,
that's gonna increase the amount we have to keep to meet
that nine to 12%.
Um, and also
as you heard the presentation unassigned fund balance
for the schools $739,000.
Um, There's 850,000
that's budgeted in this year's budget for this school.
So at a minimum, we're out
of fund balance on the school side as of this minute,
unless something else happens.
Um, I think there may a projection.
I've been talking to Abigail quite a bit over the past few
months and struggling with, you know, coming into this
budget with not knowing how we got built or what's in it
and trying to figure out how it's gonna go for the year.
So in making some of those projections, um,
there's a potential, they'll have
a deficit this year as well.
Um, the magnitude of that, we don't know.
I think Abigail's got quite wide range of what
that might be depending on
how things go over the next few months.
Um, but if they have no fund balance, which they have none
of, if they have any kind of a deficit,
it's likely gonna have to be made up out of the city side
of fund balance temporarily.
So we just need to be cognizant of that as we're deciding
what to use our excess fund balance for.
That would be expected in normal circumstances to be
reimbursed to the city over time, depending on
what the agreement might be
and what they figure that out, I guess, when we know
what it is at the end of the fiscal year.
Um, but typically in those situations it would be some kind
of an understanding between the city
and school that you're gonna have
to raise funds on your side to get,
refund us our fund balance
and hopefully at the same time generate fund balance on the
school side, um, to get them back up to, uh,
where they should be having a affordable fund balance.
So it's a, it's a big challenge
and I'm sure gonna talk about it in a minute.
Uh, that's it, that's all I have
for the most significant things.
And then as you know, we're going into our budget cycle
and we'll be meeting with you guys in April to go
through department budgets and all of that stuff.
Yay. Um, you best Time of year.
Thank you so much, Scott.
I realized that I was rude to our guests.
I would like to, um, have the members
of the school board introduce themselves
and, uh, I'm also a school staff, uh,
Johanna Prince, assistant superintendent.
I'm George Entwistle, I'm the interim superintendent.
Abigail Ketin, director of finance.
Rose Maries representing District three.
Tyler Smith, uh, district two, Lenni Richardson at large,
clear Holman at large.
Thank you very much. And I, I didn't say welcome,
but welcome Shouldn, we introduce us too.
Yeah, I was gonna say, should we finish? Can we, okay.
We can just figure we're up there.
Uh, Carter Scott for district one.
Brian, district three. Jess Walker, district four.
Ellen Sanborn, finance director for the city.
And Rachel Coleman. District two.
And I'm Elise Tipton, district five.
I'm Natalie West at large. Matthew. So Lodge.
Scott Bradley, city manager.
Okay, we got that done. Alright.
Is it over to you, Scott, or is it over to you? Joe
School. I actually think
It'll be George. And
we do have some slides,
So if you wanna Switch that.
Um, in addition to the slides that George is gonna present,
I do have handouts for the council members,
School Board and staff. I will
Give you digital copies.
Whoops. Thank you very
much. Me.
How you doing with it? Connect it up
there, Joe.
That's the presentation that, there
It is. Okay.
There's there. Me neither. I'll take one.
Do I have to switch anything back here
Saying it a couple times?
I never would.
It's very, it is a mystery to me.
I can try a different adapter and see if,
So
I hope we don't see things differently.
Nathan, um,
s CT folks, they
trying to, what is the electronics aren't working.
People, contractors, deadlines,
Adapters.
Well, it looks like she's having a little mini stroke.
It's not good. It's a Google Slides presentation
of someone has the ability to project that.
Share it off. Another husband's back.
I didn't.
It is very much not issue. That's Oh, okay.
You want we,
um, what?
No, not yet. Okay. How do you want to get it?
Hey, Joe George on the, we could do public comment now.
Um, it looks like there's a
c
you sent to Hall Display, but not for an hour.
We
stopped updating and we have really,
Louy and Scott,
We have really lousy audio
and transfer at the, at the lecture hall.
So it's a trade off.
I'm just gonna build in 15 minutes to tech challenges.
No, I have to get my,
my own computer.
I didn't think I would need it.
Yeah, it's not a public wifi,
so I think Nathan's got it.
Hey folks. Um, this is a little irregular,
but I was wondering, um, could I get, just get a little show
of hands so we can know approximately
how much public comment we could have.
The only thing I'm concerned about is if it starts snowing
on all of us and we're like, ah, what to do.
Some of our staff members have quite a distance,
but who's planning to make public comment?
Can you ask how many on the budget and how many on
The Yes, yes.
Okay. I think we should be fine. More about
The budgets. Can you just
ask how many on the budget
and how many on the resiliency?
Sure. How many for the school budget? Yeah.
And how many for resiliency. Okay.
A little less on the resiliency. Nearly equal split.
Thank you very much.
I'll have to, I'll have to move this one. Okay.
You'll do it. Thank you very much. So you can just,
Okay.
As I said earlier, I'm George Tle.
I'm the, uh, interim superintendent.
It's nice to be with all of you here tonight.
I have the pleasure of being the conversation starter.
Um, my colleagues said that I could do this tonight.
It's, um, it's quick. It's to the point.
And, um, and, and I hope that it's helpful.
My intention is to give you
the 2000 foot view of the budget.
You know, when I as a superintendent,
before I knew that I was clicking into
what was happening in our budgets when I could tell a,
a story that somebody
who didn't know anything about schools could understand.
So that's what I'm practicing again tonight.
My colleague colleagues, Jo, Dr. Joe Prince
and Abigail Chen are really the experts in
terms of the details.
And they tell me that they'll take on the tough questions.
Admittedly, my time here in South Portland
has been very short.
Um, I will finish my one year interim, uh, in, in June,
but I do think that I understand the story behind
what I see in the current budget and the recent history.
Can we go to that next slide?
Um, of course, the timeline is familiar to a lot
of the folks on the council,
certainly everyone on the board.
Um, th this year we
really got a very early start on the budget.
Um, we've engaged, we've already engaged
many stakeholders in important conversations.
We've already implemented Curtailments on spending,
So there we are in February.
Um, and again, we have a lot of ground laid, as you'll see.
Go to that next slide.
This is an important part of the story.
Indeed, what you're looking at is the number
of positions in the school, the staffing,
and you're also looking at enrollment.
Enrollment is the red line.
And as the enrollment has been started out kind
of steady, took a little blip up, uh, you can see
that it has continued to, um,
uh, uh, go down.
Um, It really
helps explain why we are in the current situation
that we're in since 2017,
we've added about 82 positions
while at the same time the student population has decreased
by more than 300 students.
So we've got, we've got some, some organizational,
uh, adjusting to do, go the next one, please.
Um, now this is really quite interesting
and quite honestly, it's the second part
of the story I want to tell you.
Um, in the, uh, previous years,
you see that we not only had red
and blue as extra funds coming in, but we also had green.
And green was the, um, the COVID money that was here
for three years and then it disappeared.
And the problem was that it disappeared,
but the trajectory of spending that was going up
continued to, uh, to, to go up.
We'll move on to the next one.
Um, for those of you who can see, uh,
those numbers up there, you'll see there's options.
A, B and CA is rolling forward.
The current spending, it could result in,
and I, I don't wanna say this number,
but it could result in a 19% tax increase,
which of course is crazy.
We know that scenario.
So that, but that's status quo.
If we were to carry everything
that we're doing now forward, that would be the number.
Option B, the school board requested that we look at
the impact of a six,
6% tax increase in the school budget.
And you'll see those numbers there and the contrast.
So we're now talking from 19%
to about 6% in terms of increases in taxes.
And then what we wanted to do was to,
and we've tried that, we've looked at it
and it, um, it, it is a little shocking
and, and a little, um, scary, I suppose.
And we decided to take a look at option C, um,
which we thought would be a good contrast to the other two.
Um, option C gives a look at
what a 9.8% increase would look like.
Um, and then I, I'm gonna follow up with some visuals
to give you a sense of how these, how these pieces,
uh, look together.
The other thing that will be introduced, um,
in these next couple of slides, they're, my last two slides
are, are really, um, a sense of a few projects, um,
that we have to curtail spending to
decrease our overall operational costs.
Um, so I, I'll explain them.
So let's go to the first of those.
Oh, I guess we, um, we actually,
I said about the projects that we're looking at.
These are the three projects.
Um, we have, uh, one that is actually
the school board has requested a formal propo
proposal on last night at the school board.
Um, and it's has to do with our,
the five elementary schools.
And what we would do is look at a grade configuration,
and we would also, um, uh, in that grade configuration,
we would have three of the, uh,
current elementary schools become, uh, two
through four grades, two through four schools
or intermediate schools
and the other, um, so there's three that would do that.
And then two primary schools.
Um, we, we would become just that primary schools.
The second initiative would be to look at schedules
and responsibilities of staff, um,
at our two largest schools, both the middle school
and the high school for changes and deficiencies.
And the third is to explore shift changes
and other creative ideas
to realize operational efficiencies
basically in all other areas.
I, I'm going to not ask that question there right now,
but I am gonna move on to the, to the, okay.
So option B, um, as I said,
option B is, is really taking a look at the 6%,
um, tax increase.
The, the ask that was from the, the school board,
when you look at the projects on the right hand side, um,
they can, uh, address savings.
Um, of the blue is the
elementary school project.
That could be a project, uh, that we could save,
uh, $2 million.
Um, the other two, uh, projects that I explained
and are, that are represented there, um, each represent, uh,
a million dollars in savings.
Even if we were to do the initiatives,
those three big initiatives,
and they were to, um, secure the savings that we want, uh,
we would still have, um, uh, 3 million plus dollars
that we would still need to work on to get to
a 6% increase.
I'll move to option C.
This is the one that we've, um, selected.
It's the one that I talked about in terms
of being a 9.8% increase.
You can see what happens here is
that we still have the same, uh, projects, uh,
the same, uh, results from the three projects, the blue
and the red and the yellow.
Um, and it would decrease that sort
of unmet need, that sort of unplanned for, uh,
reduction that we would still need to do
beyond the operational and organizational planning change.
Um, but that would be reduced
to just a little over a million dollars.
So I would present that to you, um,
as I introduced it as the conversation starter.
And, um, how do we go from here?
Um, well, thank you George. Sure.
Um, I think that is, I,
I think I, I would like to invite the counselors,
since I know that the school board members have seen these
numbers and these pieces apply.
Did the counselors have any questions
for in interim superintendent? Yes. Absolute.
I have to kind of quick, um, apples to apples questions.
So slide seven is in dollars
and slide eight is in percentages.
Yeah. Can you just gimme a rough translation of even if it's
what would slide seven equal in a rough percentage, just
so apple to apples?
Sure. Sorry. So percentages for the pie on slide.
Uh, one, the apple option B. Yeah. Uh, sure.
Um, I think it's dollar maybe clarify that the,
the dollars are the same for the blue, red,
yellow, correct, correct.
Yeah. Yeah. So essentially it's a $2 million difference
between those, between the two, between the two
that all lands in the green slice of the pie
that you saw up there.
Meaning that we would be closer to being on track
to a solution.
Right. Proposed solution, uh, in option C.
So option option B is a $3.5 million gap.
And the option C is a about one, 1.1 million, 1.1,
about 1.1 billion.
Thank you. Yep.
Other questions? Counselors, counselor West,
Just to follow up. So
we're still, but option C takes would
take a lot more from the city,
Correct? Yes.
It has a higher tax burden for this.
Um, and again, I think important to note that we recognize
that that 9.8% is still just the school share
of a tax increase.
It is not reflective of
what would come from the city or the county
As well. And then
just one more follow up.
When you say that the, um, enrollment has decreased 300
by since 2017, what is the total enrollment right now?
And if you know it off, just what's the breakdown
between elementary, middle, and high school?
And I think you just said 300,
but I think it was more like 800 to
A thousand. I said 300.
That is decreased, but this it, correct. 300 that
Quiz. Yeah.
Sorry, just pulling up that number for you right now.
I'm, I'm just trying, the reason I'm asking is I'm
thinking from an arithmetic point of view, if it's down 300,
what should we, and we just try to carry the cost across,
what should we looking at for some kind of a decrease?
I mean, it's just an arithmetic way to go,
but it's what I'm thinking. It's
A little under 3000.
Yeah. At the beginning of fe, uh,
February it was 2,748 students.
Uh, next year, the middle school, the grades five
through eight are projected to be the largest
Chunk of that.
Sorry, what was that Number Again?
Yep.
Uh, 2,748.
So just we've had more than a 10% reduction. Correct.
But we've never decreased our expenditures.
They just have kept going up and up and up. Mm-hmm.
Other questions or do you have more?
Nope, that'll be it for now.
On the, um, oh, sorry. No, Please, counselor Scott,
On the enrollment and staffing changes,
I just wanna confirm the 2017 numbers.
It's a little over 3000 students to
a little over 550 staff.
And do you have an estimation for the 2,700
what that staff reduction would be?
And is that part of, um,
the pie, the pie, the pies, the operations and efficiencies?
Yellow? I guess. So let me ask more clearly.
Besides those numbers,
I'm just wondering if staff reductions to try
and balance the number of sort of staff to student ratio
is a part of the operational efficiencies in the budget.
All four of the pieces of pie? It is,
It's an important piece. Is a,
There is staff reduction.
It's 80 per 80% of expenses in schools.
It is, uh, staff.
And is there sort of a target staff to student ratio
anywhere in Maine?
Uh, there are, there are state guidelines for class sizes.
Um, those are, it's in high schools, it's up to 35 students.
It's, it's very, very large.
What we have pulled together
for the board's consideration is a comparison
to Cumberland County districts, along with districts
that share a similar profile to us in terms of, uh,
multilingual students in special education,
our McKinney Bento youth who are homeless, um,
and our students from lower socioeconomic status to try
and look at kind of what is a norm expectation
for per pupil test.
As another way to kind of answer that same question.
So I think trying to get at that same idea,
do you want me to let others, can I follow up on that?
Sure. Um, so I want to also make sure I understand too,
that while the student size,
the enrollment size has gone down
and staff size has gone up, that's gone up
because if I understand things correctly, needs
of our student population has changed exponentially.
And so more staff is required to meet
less students than it was in 2017.
Correct. Okay.
So it's not as simple as just, you know, we have 200 staff
or 200 students and, you know, 20 staff.
It's the needs of those 200 students
that would dictate the numbers.
Thank you. Did you have another question?
My other question was just if,
and I listened to the,
I think the presentation last, uh, week.
If you could help me understand a parent, someone married
to a school employee, um, how does sort
of the reconfiguration of the pre-K and one and two three,
but still maintaining five schools,
save money, if you don't mind.
Do you guys want me to take notes? Um, sure.
And, and the, the biggest factor there is that,
uh, currently
because we have five schools operating across the district,
we may have individual class sizes of between 10
and 15 students in a building.
If all of your third grade
or half of your third graders are in one building, uh,
the classes sizes would go up, but it would take fewer staff
because of the larger class sizes.
So you are able to reduce the number of teacher positions
that it would take to meet the same student.
Um, demand. But you still need five schools.
There's not an option to reduce the number
of schools that are operating.
Sure. I think it's a really important question
and I think we plan to, to do some math on that
to make sure, I think important for the council
and for the public to be aware
that Maine legislation has required that with
within two years we've taken on the provision
of special education students for children who are,
uh, age three to five.
So that means that we have an obligation
to meet more student need
as child development services transitions
to our responsibility.
That does not necessarily mean we need to have classrooms
for three year olds, but we do potentially need
to have space to provide special education services.
We also are not yet at universal pre-kindergarten
for four year olds, so don't want to be shortsighted
to close a building that we then
reach capacity in a few more years.
Um, but again, I think there's enough interest in
that question that we wanna bring it forward
for consideration, um, as the board deliberates.
But those, those students don't go
into the enrollment numbers.
Like students that you're meeting those needs for
that are three to five are not part of enrollment
or they are, they they would be, yeah.
Yes. Yeah. Uh, depending at a certain threshold, I guess.
And when we talk about, um, increase class size, we're,
we're not saying that we would go beyond the, the limits
that have been set for the school.
Sure, sure. By the school board.
By the school board, yeah, because it,
and that's what I was trying to get to too, is
the state guidelines
for class size are significantly more than
what South Portland School Board has adopted.
So even though we're talking about increasing class size in
this, uh, in this reconfiguration,
we would not be talking about going beyond the guidelines
that are provided by the school board at present. Thank
You. Councilor
West Are, are any of those costs
for the three year olds reimbursed by the state?
There are some. So we have, uh, joined on to participate
with cohort, the cohort that begins this July.
So next year we will take on responsibility
for four year olds.
There is some additional revenue that will come in
as a result of that.
Some of that is one time money if you need
to make facilities changes.
And then some of it is ongoing money.
Um, so again, there are some dollars that could impact
this picture, but we don't have a firm, uh, amount yet.
Okay. And I have two more questions.
Ask them. I have one.
So, uh, I just curious about what the class sizes are
that have been determined by the school board.
So you can tell me that second and but first is
before I leave the pre-K,
suppose we suppose we redid Mahoney
and we had extra space. I'm serious,
You're not the first person who's asked
And we had extra space in Mahoney.
Could we use that to meet that pre-K need?
Sure. There's some specific requirements
for our youngest learners around the physical entrance,
exit playgrounds and such.
Okay. But with, with dollars, yes, you could design
With dollars, you can do it, It's all matter.
You could design those appropriate spaces
and how close bathrooms are and so on.
Okay.
Dr. Prince, Can I just hear the class sizes?
Sure. Yep. I just was pulling that up.
Um, uh, it is
20 students K through two
and 24 in grades three and four.
Thank you. May I ask a question?
Um, am I mishearing
or am I hearing correctly that, um,
with the current, with, well with the current possible,
um, mix remix of the elementary schools that,
uh, pre-K serve, there would be an expanded number of slots,
not just because you're absorbing child development
services, but that you're actually,
that South Portland would,
because this has been something South Portland has wanted
for a while would be cer offering more pre-K spots.
I think that's something that the
board will need to consider.
Currently we have four classrooms
of pre-K in our own buildings.
If we were to expand to a fifth
or sixth locally funded classroom,
that takes an investment from the board.
We also have a partnership model for pre-K
that we currently offer.
At one offsite location.
We are in talks with another partner,
and then we are also in talks with Head Start.
That partnership
or Head Start model is a route for us
to expand access without cost to the local taxes.
So depending on which doors we open, uh,
the hope would be that yes, there are more seats next year
for our four year olds
Access without cost.
If you could just do that all,
it's a really good, it's a really
Good deal.
Um,
Yeah. Thank you.
And you know, I I I do see you.
Um, I was asking counselors if they have questions,
but I'm not meaning to say
that school board members have to sit in silence.
So, um, councilor Walker,
This is one of the things that came up at the, um,
in-person event last week, which by the way,
I said earlier too, when we were getting settled, I wanted
to congratulate you all because it was a wonderful event
as a member of the public to attend.
Um, so thank you for that. Um,
but also one of the things that came up
that I just have been thinking about a lot since then,
and I wondered if this was an opportunity
that maybe the city staff could also weigh in on as well,
is about the, uh,
two different start times at middle school.
And I know that that had come up
and you had had talked about how there needed
to be traffic studies and different things like that.
But is that, is that a cost saving?
Is that a significant cost savings if all things were equal?
And then second, is there a way that the city
and the schools can partner to make that something
that happens or is that a state?
Sure, I can share a little bit about that.
Um, first on the cost savings, yes, we do anticipate
that it is a cost savings
because we currently have staff
that can't teach across four grade levels.
So that means that you have more replication of classes, um,
because of that structure.
Additionally, staffing meetings
and extracurricular pro programs, there's just more of it.
Um, in our consultation with the city
and then with a traffic consultant,
the school department needs to apply for a traffic
movement permit through the Department of Transportation.
Um, that cost of applying
for the permit is $25,000 as an investment.
And once the traffic study is done, we have been told
that it's then six to 12 months
before a permit could be approved.
So we would like to keep moving forward with that idea,
but it's not, it, it's unlikely
that it could impact FY 27, it would be one year out.
Uh, if, if all of this is, um, if all
of those pieces go together,
Eleni. But to
Jess's point, I mean Ken,
I mean we're sitting here with the city right now.
Is that, is that permitting something
that could be expedited?
It's through the DOT, so it's more Oh, the
DOT, The DT permit. So
Do you know anybody at the DOT? Well,
We're certainly happy to try make falls,
but we're subject to the same delays too. So
I question if anybody knows anything, what would cause
a six to 12 month period in the find for a permit?
Is that just a staffing thing? I mean, that sounds,
Yeah, I'm not sure what their, that sounds
Other worldly. If
they, if they're, if they're workload
or if they're short staffed
or if it takes just time to review different data.
Um, but, uh, hopefully it's closer to the six month end,
but either way it's probably not gonna impact.
I I will say, I know just being on a prior council,
which maybe only Councilor Pride
was on when this issue was brought up, the council at
that time was concerned with the start time at the same time
because of traffic issues.
And so it wasn't ever written anywhere
until like the referendum
or condition of sending the bond to voters.
But there was the concern that the, the,
the staggered start time was directly proposed
to reduce traffic impacts.
And so, um, but,
but as, as was stated there, there would need
to be a DOT study
and if there is shown to be traffic impacts,
they'll have to be mitigation.
That would have to be done in order for that to be issued.
So
Can I ask some clarifying questions on that?
And this is also something
that I was wondering, um, last week too.
So what is the start time?
What are the two start times now in middle school?
Uh, they're separated by 45, 50 minutes.
Um, it is,
uh, So grades five
through six is 8 45, grades seven through eight is 7 55
and or that's when the doors open.
I'm not sure what time the bell officially rings. Okay.
And this is probably something
that I'm just incur on myself,
but I don't understand why we have to do a traffic study
for the same, we're not changing locations,
we're moving the same population of students
to the same spot, from the same spots to the same spots
to separate it by 45 minutes.
Why does that, it has to do
with the congestion on Westcot Road with skill
and the middle school and the flow of traffic, uh,
if you have ever been caught there.
Oh, yeah. Um, so again, um,
I, I think it's, it's just
that congestion right there during drop off.
And Council
Rus, is it possible to put slide four up again,
which is the funding changes slide?
Because I think that's a instructive slide
that I just, it's hard for me.
I don't know if my colleagues can read these, but
It, it's possible I can't even read it.
No, I have, it's even kind of small. Yeah, I can't.
And and helpful for the audience too,
because then we're looking at what,
what we've seen over time.
Thank you for indulging me with that question.
Oh no. Constantly stuck there.
Well, Scott's bringing up those slides.
I would just say, you know, that, that,
that it is a DOT permitting question.
Uh, however, I think that there are some things
that can be done on the school side.
You have very convenient drop off pickup.
Um, that could, creates a huge amount of congestion
and unnecessary drop off pickup
that happens in the turnaround
that could be moved someplace else.
Uh, there, there's significant savings in that as, um,
as Joe Prince talked about the staffing,
but it, it is the, the school that has
the most administrative, there's, there's a principal
and three assistant principals, and that's all
because of the staggered star times.
So there's, there's savings in there, uh, both
on teaching staff and, and administrative staff.
Just One more question for the public.
All the slides that we're seeing tonight,
are these available on school's
Website? Yes. Yes. They
will be put up.
I apologize they weren't there before,
but we'll make sure they're on our budget page.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Manager.
You're good. So we're
Just, I'll stay here just in case.
This is just for contemplation.
We don't have specific questions. Councilor West?
No, I just think it's interesting to look at the,
what we are seeing in terms of the increases and
When. Okay.
Well,
And just to go back to council walker's question that, um,
when a permit is required is also dictated by state law.
I wasn't exactly sure of all the parameters,
but it has to do with a project that generates X amount
or more of passenger car equivalents per peak hour.
Tri triggers the need for them to review that. So
Thank you. I'll send that
off. Can I ask another?
So yeah, I was going to say that I think
that we don't want to not ask questions about the material.
We want a thorough understanding
and we do soon have to move to maybe the more difficult part
of our to liberations this evening.
So yes, please. I can see it. It's fine.
Or no, I know I've shut you down publicly. Oh my goodness.
It's fine. It's, I can Wait. Okay.
Um, and how do we move to the more, uh,
difficult part of our conversations?
I mean, we have been asked by the school department to, um,
give feedback
after seeing a lot of this information, which is,
which is sobering.
And yet I keep wanting to say, you know,
the thing about the one window closes and another one opens.
I wanna be looking at some, some good things
that, um, can happen with change.
But we have been asked to, um, provide for you
from the council's perspective, some of budget guidance
that we think, um, the taxpayers of South Portland, um,
would understand.
I think I'll phrase it that way
because perhaps our taxpayers won't
like certain numbers,
but they may be able to understand them, um, relative
to the situation that the schools are in.
And understanding that educating our youth
is a pretty darn important thing to do.
So, um, how do you wanna do this?
I, I I am, you know,
we could just, do you have an Yeah.
Comment first before we discuss? Oh, oops.
Oh yeah, you guys. Sorry about that.
Alright, three minutes is our public comment time.
Um, we ask you to come to the podium, please say your name.
You can choose to say the street that you live on.
You do not have to say your entire address.
There'll be a little timer running so you can see when you,
it's time to wrap up on your three minutes
and you can all thank Counselor Pride
for reminding me of this.
Hi guys, can you hear me? Okay. I'm Jenny Lika.
I live on Bauer Street.
Thank you so much for giving me an opportunity to speak.
I appreciate it. I honestly just have some questions
because I want you all to be, just be thinking questions
because we should all not be accepting
a $7 million over in the budget.
I was just like, oh, okay. That's okay.
Yeah, let's just cut a bunch of stuff and move on.
No, we should have a lot of questions about how we got here.
So I just wanna put that out there.
Um, and then I, I wanna kind of talk about some
of the things we, we haven't spoken about today.
Um, one is that
the union president Sergey got up six weeks ago
and told the school board members that she would like
to see the historical figures
of what's going on in administration,
what's going on in the central office as far as positions.
We still don't have that information.
It has been six weeks and we don't have that information.
I think we should all be asking what's going on in the
central office, how does that compare to other districts?
And be looking at that perhaps
before we look at cutting the educators
who are meeting one-on-one with our students.
Um, I also, you know, just furthermore with kind of
that employee situation, uh, we,
we heard from the superintendent who,
who's in charge right now, since 2017,
we've had 82 new positions.
Organizational adjusting, he said has not happened.
Why has organizational adjusting not happened?
We should all be asking that question of the school board,
what they've been doing since 2017.
Obviously the enrollment didn't decline,
didn't start till the last three years.
Why didn't we start assessing the enrollment decline sooner
and addressing it with staffing changes?
And why aren't we looking at it now?
What are those 82 positions we've created since 2017?
Why does it make more sense
to blow up our elementary school infrastructure
to take away neighborhood schools from the community
that makes more sense to everyone.
And to do that in six months than
to look at the 82 positions created since 2017?
I don't, I don't understand.
Um, I'd also really like you
to think about the elementary school
teachers, Rachel Coleman.
I know you worked at, uh,
you worked at a nursing home for 20 years, right?
22. 22.
When you work at a place for a long time,
you start feeling like they're your family.
All the elementary school teachers already feel like their
family might be taken away from them.
Let that soak in. All
of our good teachers are nervous right now about losing
their jobs and losing their community already.
And we need to do something to make them feel like we're
behind them and to make them understand quickly what's going
to happen based on this tricky budget year.
Um, and I
also had one more thing.
The slush fund, 9% of the city's slush fund needs
to be in place based on last year's budget.
I'd like us to have a rule like that in the school board.
Thank you.
Thank you. Come on down.
Hello.
Uh, my name is Sarah Gay. I live on Walnut Street.
I am a parent of South Portland students. I'm a taxpayer.
I am a 17 year school department employee
and I'm president of the South
Portland Teachers Association.
Um, thank you, appreciate that.
Um, I, I think that something that I'm hoping we can surface
and have in the open if we are thinking
about how we ended up here.
Um, there has been a great deal ascribed to staff salaries
and understandably, yes, that is 80% of our budget.
We fully appreciate
and understand that in a situation like this
and with our enrollment changes, regardless of the makeup
of our student body, we know that cuts are inevitable.
We understand that. Um,
but I think I need to speak on behalf of the teachers,
the ed techs, the clerks,
and the office managers who finished negotiating this year.
Um, we did so in good faith.
We did so with the intention of providing our people
with livable wages, with fair opportunity, with factors
that would help pull people out of systemic problems
and help them be in front of our,
our students being the people that those kids need.
Um, and we did so with the expectation
that the district would negotiate salaries
that were manageable within the budget.
Um, it does not appear that that took place,
and I need it to be extraordinarily clear
that at no point did any staff come into negotiations
with the intention of, ha ha ha,
we're going to take all the money.
Um, I think that that's something that is,
is certainly going to circulate.
That's a sentiment that I know folks are going
to feel throughout the community
in some way, shape, or form.
Um, and just need to name that that is not,
was never the intent was not what happened.
Um, I think that I was grateful to hear the question about
what types of learners we have, not just how many.
I think that is a question that is much deeper
and more complex, um, than we have discussed so far.
Um, is very worth additional learning.
Um, I also think that we are in a position now where we know
that staffing is a significant cost,
but um, we have so far heard only about cuts to staff
and I'm glad to hear questions about other considerations
that are not exclusively losing positions.
Um, we had a budget season last year where losses
of positions were the solution.
Um, and we understand that it has to be more than that now.
But so far that's what we've heard.
And I think that trust
and confidence amongst employees within the school
department after weathering the best, the budget season
that we did last year, we need to see the value
of our positions manifest through consideration
of other budget cuts.
Certainly in addition,
but as a means hopefully of preserving some
of those positions and keeping staff in their roles,
keeping the adults in front of our kids
who they look to every day. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Keep 'em coming. Please.
Comments if there are not no more comments relating
to the school budget.
We're going to close. Public comment.
Are there, seemed like there was more of a show
of hands earlier in the
evening. Thank you.
Hi, um, my name is Rose Devlin and I live on Pine Street
and I am just concerned about the idea
to reconfigure our elementary schools.
Um, this may seem small,
but I run a bike bus in South Portland.
Um, we have a route where we go from
Berry Village and through,
Um, different neighborhoods
and we pick up kids at specific times
and we arrive at school altogether.
Um, and we play music, we get fresh air
and exercise and we build community.
Sometimes we have up to 50 people.
Um, it's truly a joyful experience
and I worry that if we move all our kindergartners
and first graders to a school
that's like potentially really far away,
they wouldn't be able to participate.
And it just seems a little bit sad to me
that we would replace those like bike mornings
with cars and more traffic.
So that's all.
Thank you. Um,
I actually had a lot more written than I'm gonna say
'cause you answered a lot of the questions
that I really have never gotten answers for before.
So repeat yourself please. I appreciate that. Oh, sorry.
I'm, my name is Victoria Libby
and I'm a South Portland resident
and I have, um, a child in elementary school
and hoping to have another one in elementary school as well.
Um, I, you know,
am concerned about the three main
ideas that have been provided.
This is the first time that I've heard more blatantly about,
you know, the cuts of teachers.
Um, but I want to kind of echo what's been talked about
before in terms of changing our elementary schools, um,
for the sake of making class sizes, uh, larger
and cutting some of the teacher staff.
Um, so at a
time when loneliness is a recognized public health crisis,
we should be protecting
and strengthening, not weakening the connections that go
through neighborhoods schools.
A grade level model would likely fragment the neighborhood
ties already established in South Portland communities.
I urge the board to prioritize solutions
that keep students connected to their neighborhoods,
protect classroom size
and clearly demonstrate
how any structural changes will truly benefit our children
and our educators.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Public comment
about the school budget.
It Thank you. City too.
Well, yes, it's true.
It could be about the city, but
maybe we'll take it again this time.
Hi, I'm, I'm Leslie Gatcombe
Hines and I live on Elmont Avenue.
And I have a question just
because I know the, the mental health resources were cut
and I don't know how that's affected the teachers and the,
and the staff and um, the students.
So I was just wondering about that. Can anybody,
If you're asking a specific question,
so yeah, a specific question.
Generally the city manager
or in this case one of the, um, the school superintendent
or assistant superintendent would answer the question.
Yeah. So I, But usually it not while you're standing
there, it's after you
Come to it would be after your comments.
Right. Okay. Thank you.
Thanks very much. Anyone else?
And our city manager reminds me that, um,
you can expand a bit onto the city.
What you, the preliminary
that you heard about our city budget, also you, that's fine.
Jack proposal, 1 95 Walnut Street.
Um, I've looked at the graphs
and I've listened to the, uh,
proposals of AB and C 6% for B nine,
nine point whatever.
For c um,
taxpayers can't be eating 9.2% or 9.8%.
Taxpayers can't be eating 6%.
So we need to find a way
to get the school budget down
to a responsible percentage so that taxpayers
can buy into the system.
We've gone through tax increases.
Last year's taxes, the school budget was six point whatever,
and the city budget was,
um, whatever it was.
So we were at a 12% or whatever.
We also got hit,
everyone in this room got hit if they own a piece
of property by our tax assessor, uh, where he assessed our
property again
and my property went up about 27,000 in probably every one
of you in this room that own a piece of property knows
that your property went up, not your house, just your lot.
We don't know what the tax assessor's gonna do
to us again this year.
Um, we don't know yet what the municipal budget's going
to be, but listening to some of the people speaking,
I think we need to see from the top down,
from administration on down where they can make cuts
that will work for everyone
and will also work for the taxpayers.
I looked at the graph. The graph was, you know,
enrollment going down,
but we hired all these people back in 2017 or whatever.
What are we doing with 'em?
And I know we want to have the teachers in the classroom,
but we also only have 2,700 kids
in our whole school system.
This is not a big school system.
And we need to look at administration first from the top
down as what we're going to do if you go online
and look at some of these numbers.
Um, I did some research
and when I went online, the first 25 names
that I saw we're making over six figures.
So something has to be done.
We don't need all these principals.
We don't need all these administrators.
We don't need all these directors
or whatever we have in the administration.
30 seconds. We need to start looking at where we can reduce
and save money for the taxpayers. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Is there anyone else? Yes.
It looks like we have someone else. My
Name is Chelsea Smirky.
I live on Clinton Street. I'm a parent.
I also am a weekly substitute
and volunteer in the classroom.
And I see how after last year's budget deficit of $1 million
and over 20 people lost their jobs.
How the teachers have had to really absorb
that loss in the classroom.
They do it with such a level of grace
that our children would never know
what they've missed out on.
And I see how much patience it takes
to have extra kids in the class, kids
that maybe need more supports each and every week.
With two of these budget options,
you're still looking at a one
to $3 million deficit the following school year.
So my question is, why are we waiting to apply
for a permit from the DOT that would potentially you,
you see that that's an excess
that can easily be solved with that permit.
Why are we waiting? When are we applying for that?
Because it sounds like it could be 12 months from then.
Why aren't we doing that?
Why aren't we looking at administration?
As was said before, because our teachers are the frontline.
They are doing an amazing job.
And the emotional burden on them not knowing
what comes next, not knowing if they will have jobs,
doesn't feel fair
because they're the ones that are
directly educating our children every single day
and they're doing such an amazing job of it.
And they deserve more from all of us.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Uh, ed Cobb Road.
I was online and, uh, saw the 10% possibility
of tax increase and sort of drove my way down here.
Um, last year I brought up a question of the state seems
to think that we can do this for $55 billion,
roughly speaking thereabouts.
And somehow we spent $20 million last year.
And yet here we are again, where the state says,
roughly speaking, we can spend $55 million
and we're talking about 78, $80 million.
And it just seems a little crazy to me how
we're finding a way to spend $20 million more than
what the state recommends.
And I guess at some point, you know, I,
I can appreciate being concerned about having a job,
but I can also appreciate being able
or being able to afford your property
taxes or being homeless.
And I guess the question is what is more important?
'cause I don't really want to be homeless
and I certainly don't want a $6,600 tax bill,
which could go up astronomically more based on other
spending that this, uh, council
has discussed for the last two years.
So with that, I guess I'd like to understand what it is
or why it is we cannot meet what the state says
and we continue to just spend more and more and more.
And it just, uh, it's gonna get to the point where some
of us just aren't gonna be able to, uh, live here anymore.
And it's unfortunate. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Anyone else with comments?
It's all right.
And remember, you could make a comment about city schools.
I don't see anyone with a hand raised,
so public comment is closed on this topic.
Thank you. And thank you all of you very much.
Alright. We had some questions,
some specific questions. It's
Gonna be looking this way a lot because I think all eight
or nine questions were,
Remember you could make a comment about the city schools.
I don't see anyone with a hand raised what just happened.
So comment is closed on this topic. Thank you.
Coming here. Thank you all.
See, I'm getting a job as a ventriloquist.
Nice. So, uh, one of the first questions
for the school was, um,
what's the central office staffing numbers?
And I guess to tie it into another question,
are those being looked at for cuts as well?
Sure. I think, I mean, I can speak to, we know
that everything is on the table
and every position, um, has
to be considered in the district.
Um, and apologies that there's been a delay in getting that,
that data out.
Um, right now we have a mechanism for folks
to submit questions.
We have 51 questions sitting in the queue to be answered,
um, and jobs to full-time run the district.
So trying to do the, those pieces of work
and make sure people get that information,
but apologies that there's been a longer delay there.
Um, we will work to get that out.
And if I can just add to that, uh, just to say
that last year the central office staff
took a salary freeze.
That was a recommendation by the school board.
And everybody, uh, who were non bargaining staff
from the superintendent on down at central office
did take a salary freeze
and did not incur any salary increases.
So I just want that to be known publicly as well.
Next question was, um,
why weren't organizational adjustments?
Uh, why didn't that those occur since 2017?
Why are they occurring now?
I I think for those of us that lived
through the budget last year, we,
we have started this process.
We went through a difficult process to begin downsizing from
that influx of dollars that we had through COVID
and then post pandemic.
As we welcomed more
and more asylum seekers in our communities, we, uh,
had another adjustment.
Um, so again, I think
that the district did make strides last
year to address that.
It is difficult to downsize.
We, we recognize that, um,
and we recognize that that has
to continue based on the declining enrollment
and the, the budget constraints.
Uh, why are, why is there, why is, um, the school looking
to take away the elementary schools from neighborhoods
rather than look at some of the 82 positions
that were created since 2017 as a way to save?
Sure. And that has to do mostly
with the complexity of our students.
Uh, the majority of those 82 positions are
actually in our ed tech and our teaching force.
Um, certainly there have been new administrator roles
created and like I said, uh,
both central office leadership roles
and, uh, the administrators association, um, will be,
are under review for this.
Um, but that is not 82 administrators.
We have 13 principals in the district,
and then we have 10 folks in the central office cabinet.
Um, so again, it's,
it's across all levels that I think we'll have to,
Um, what was the impact
of mental health resources being cut?
Uh, sure. I can speak a little to this.
Last year, folks that were in the community know
that we did reduce the, uh,
social emotional learning positions that were purchased
or supported through COVID era dollars.
We have reduced those.
We have been able to maintain high levels of, uh,
social work services.
And I can give you a comparison.
Um, we have been looking at that staffing across the,
across the Cumberland County region.
Um, we currently have six social workers
at the high school.
Our neighboring high schools have two positions.
So again, while we wish there was more to meet the need,
uh, we feel we've done the best we can
to prioritize the resources, um,
as we have to constrain the budget.
Uh, and I think there's two more questions here.
Why aren't we applying for the DOT traffic permit now?
When are we going to apply?
Sure. Uh, we're awaiting a proposal for the application
that is due this week.
There is a $25,000 price tag to apply for that permit.
Um, and again, um, needing to balance that,
that item that we had not
anticipated, spending those dollars.
Um, certainly if there's a less expensive route to
the permiting, we would explore that as well.
But that is in the works.
And then last one, why does the South Portland budget
exceed what the state, lack of a better word,
recommended budget?
Um, call for
Sure. I'm not sure exactly
where that 55 um,
million number came from.
Maine does have legislation
around the state funding 55% of education.
However, that's a statewide figure.
And your property valuation impacts your local share.
Uh, south Portland is what's considered
towards a minimum receiver.
So for South Portland, uh, 77%
of our budget should be covered from local taxes
according to the formula.
And 22% covered from statewide.
In our more rural
or economically disadvantaged neighborhoods, you would see
that reversal again with a 55% statewide average.
So, but happy I don't see where that gentleman went.
Happy to, if you have more information. Well, I was
Just, my understanding is the,
the state gives a recommendation on what the advice should
Be. Alright. Yeah, yeah.
I apologize. You asked. No, I asked. I'm sorry.
That was me. Thank, um, again, that is that
that 55,000
or 55 million, excuse me, um, isn't in
what I'm seeing for EPS. So
Isn't say what EPS is?
Uh, essential programs and services.
It's the state funding model for giving out, uh,
the dollars to school districts.
Okay. Those were all the direct questions.
Alright, well, um, so here we are.
And, um, Madam Mayor,
Yes. If I can
say a couple things.
One, I just did wanna say
because there were comments made about our elementary
schools and neighborhood schools,
and I would just say I'm probably one
of the oldest people in the room.
We don't have neighborhood schools anymore.
When I first started teaching here,
there were 11 elementary schools.
That's when we had neighborhood schools.
There were 13 prior to my coming.
So we have a, um, I just asked today
for the information from our bus transportation director
to provide with what is the percentage of students
who are bused to our schools.
Um, and he said he has that information
and he will get that to the superintendent
and to me, uh, quickly.
But, uh, but we have schools where we have a large majority
of kids who are bused to their schools.
They're, so, they're, they're not neighborhood schools
where the majority of kids walk.
Um, the other thing is just that,
and I don't want to put him on the spot,
but he's sitting immediately to my right here is Milan,
Nevada, the director of planning.
And, uh, we did have a conversation about the permitting
and about the, um, the issue around the,
the staggered start time.
And he might have something to be able to add to that.
Now I've really put him on the spot.
But, um, but he might have some information to add to that.
Milan, can you take two minutes
to tell us why a traffic study would be
important? Thank you.
Yeah, I, Milan invited the planning director.
I, I don't know the full scope of questions. So if,
If there, if we don't no longer have staggered start time
at the middle school, what are the implications
for having a single start time
and why do we need a traffic study? Okay,
Go.
So whenever a project comes in that generates a lot of trips
or modifies how people travel on the roads, it has
to account for its impacts and slowing down
how people can move through
and any safety implications that they bring on to the roads
and Street network.
And sometimes sidewalks are part of that. Schools are large.
And so we had to go through a DOT permitting process.
Um, you have to define the scope
of your project when you do that.
And our scope of our project was a staggered start,
which affects when the trips are made.
And that affects what then has to be done to the road system
to make it safe to handle all of those trips.
So if we taper out the trips
and don't stack all the vehicles at the time,
when you also have people traveling to work,
then you're putting less strain on the system.
Uh, you'd have to do fewer intersection upgrades,
crosswalk improvements, and other kinds of things.
So, um, our project was a staggered start project.
The planning board approval, uh, was granted
with a traffic analysis based on
what DOT concluded was necessary for the school to do
to fix the problems it's going to create
when it introduces those trips.
If we change the pattern of the trips, we have to analyze
that and figure out if there are new stresses on the
transportation system and safety
that we have to then address.
So right now you have a project approved under a certain
parameter with a staggered start, you change the parameters.
You have to get an update to your permit.
Doesn't necessarily mean that you have to do anything,
but you have to show, you don't have to do anything
by doing that analysis.
Everyone ready for the quiz? Okay.
Thank you so much, Milan. That was truly helpful.
Are you finished? I am, yes. Thank you. All right.
Um, can I ask my questions?
Oh, counselor West has a couple more questions, please.
Okay. I might not have heard this properly,
but if you spend the 25,000 for the permit
and the, it's granted,
how much much do you anticipate saving if you can have
a single start time?
Um, because we found out that the timeline was longer
for this, we haven't done as much
of the math on this option.
We certainly can bring that back.
Initial estimates were probably between 400, 500,000.
Oh, that's a lot of money. It
Is. But what
is missing is if in the permitting process we are
told in order to get the permit, you have to put in
a third lane of traffic
or a third lane of, um, road.
And that would be an expense we would have to incur.
It goes for saving. Yeah.
So again, we don't, we just don't know what
that outcome could be.
It could be, as Milan just said, it could be that they say
the system can handle this, in which case it's, uh,
it's an investment well made then
And there. Oh,
excuse me. I have,
and there is a point at which you can say, well,
we investigated that thoroughly.
Now we know. So it might not make sense to do it, but Okay.
Okay. And then in terms of the benefits of the plan,
you were talking about having the KS and the other K two
and the three four, the only thing I heard was smaller class
sizes, but wouldn't there be cost of busing that you would,
um, in incur to?
Um, certainly there's the potential for that.
Currently, for folks who don't know,
we run five school schedules across our district every day,
pre-K k through 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 through 12.
And then we run a series of late buses in the afternoon.
That means our buses are crisscrossing the town,
um, throughout the day.
So we may have to think about some different bus
routes to accommodate.
Um, but in our preliminary analysis, it,
it does not look like a major cost factor,
but it may take some new, uh, some new routes
and some different times for families to expect.
So if the, the,
and I'm sure you, okay, I, I'll just go really quickly.
If you are saying the issue is
that you have 20 class sizes K through two
and 24, 3 through four, wouldn't it be pretty simple?
And the problem is that the schools
that you have have some classes
that are too small or something.
Wouldn't it be pretty simple to try
to make a slight adjustment and consolidate?
So you don't have any, I don't know
what if you have super small classes,
but that you can just kind of,
if you have to add a few more.
I mean, does every single class have an ed tech?
No. No. Okay.
But I think it's important to say that, that what we have
determined from the potential reconfiguration
of the elementary schools is about a $2 million savings.
That's significant money when we're looking at needing to,
to cut $7 million from our budget.
And, and as somebody who's sitting around this table
as a lifelong educator, I think the reconfiguration
of the elementary schools is good for kids.
I think it's good for kids.
So I think that putting, um,
multiple grades in one building
and being able to share resources, share share, uh,
teacher knowledge, you know,
improve professional development, all
of those things are good.
They're good for kids.
So I'm less worried about that.
But, um, but what I really wanted to say is with regard
to why, why we're here
and we're here looking for guidance from the city council.
And so I've heard from a number
of city councilors who've said anything from, well,
we don't really know your budget.
You know, well, yeah, you do. Our budget is publicly posted.
It is available to you as much
as every other city department.
We are a department of this city council.
And I don't think it's fair for you
to shirk your responsibility.
Your responsibility is
what this gentleman spoke about here is what is it
that the taxpayers can bear?
You don't need to be telling us what we need to cut
and where we need to cut it and how we need to do it.
That's the job of the superintendent's proposal
and the response of the school board,
what is your responsibility is to give us guidance about
what you feel the taxpayers
of this community can bear.
What? And then we have to take our pencils and sharpen them
and do our job, but the rest of it is your job.
And to just say do the best you can is not sufficient.
It's not adequate, it's not appropriate
and it's not acceptable.
Well, with all due respect,
I think, you know, know what our jobs are.
I know we're going, but I know what's been done.
I know what was done last Year. I know I sat
Here last year and we were told,
do the best you can. Yes.
Let, can we give them the benefit of the doubt?
I'm just giving my lecture
because I have a right to do that.
Yes, you absolutely do.
All I will say thank you and,
and I admire Chair DeAngelo that you are absolutely trying
to do the job you think you are responsible for
and are responsible for.
I'm just saying that I think your request has been
communicated to our counselors.
I have. Sorry. There's no shirking planned.
I don't think so. Um, so what I
Just wanna say, say I, can I actually ask a question?
Yeah. What, what is, what is the, what is,
is it prescribed somewhere what this meeting is
for tonight in terms of, you know, is it it,
is it what Rosemary said?
'cause I, or is it, I mean, what is your
Understanding? Well,
I'm gonna, of how tonight is supposed to go.
I, because I, I think, I think I wanna,
I just wanna say on behalf of myself, a school board member,
I, I wanna be as transparent and open
and flexible with you as possible.
I want to answer your questions. I wanna partner with you.
We have a problem, we need to partner on this together. Yes.
Agreed. So I would like to know,
but I would like to know what is the
Point of this evening? I
think there are three of us, at least
In a kind way. I'm sorry. We all respect
Three counselors have some idea
of how to answer your question.
It looks like Counselor Pride would like to go first.
Thank you. Um, and just
because I have sort of a longer historical view Yeah.
Because I've been at many of these meetings
and traditionally, um, as you may know,
the council has to approve your bottom line Yeah.
Before it goes to the voters. And obviously the voters are
really just gonna approve this in the end.
And we we're always cognizant of that.
But in order to give you an idea,
and especially the superintendent, an idea moving forward of
what we're likely to send to the voters,
traditionally the council has actually giving you a number.
Um, I remember, I think it was the first year we did this,
we said 4% was the target number.
Mm-hmm. And so that's really what we,
for the school side have traditionally given to.
And, and then exactly as Chair Angels said, your job is
to figure out how to make it work
and do your best you can to hit our target.
And of course, even if you don't hit our target,
often the council has given grace to the school board and,
and said, well, it's really gonna be up
to the voters anyway, but our job is to give you a target.
And did you wanna add anything? Counselor Matthews?
You know, I've been on both sides of this, uh,
12 years on the school board and, uh, supporting teachers
and, uh, fighting for the, uh,
the good numbers and everything else.
And, uh, you know, now here I am
as a city counselor looking at it
from a whole different view.
So, um, you know, it's, this meeting tonight is for us to,
it's not a kumbaya by any means.
Um, it's a, it definitely is.
Uh, council price says it's a, it's a guidance point where,
where you guys should begin.
And we've always said, I don't think that we've always said,
you know, oh, go, just figure it out.
What we've said is, you know, we'd like you to come into,
let's say 4%, and,
but we also believe that you're gonna come back
with a responsible, uh, budget.
Come back to us and tell us if you need to go higher.
And we look at it then, um,
are we gonna keep going on conversation
of where we're at right now?
'cause I'm just gonna keep going.
Um, yeah, I, well, I think we're there.
Okay. And because, uh, right now, I truly believe that,
uh, as a city counselor, that the people
of South Portland cannot afford any
of your options tonight.
Um, unfortunately I spent 12 years on the board
and I don't think we ever went above 3%.
So it's very difficult for me to figure out how we got here.
And I'm not blaming anybody,
and I'm not, I mean, times change.
Our diversity has changed as, uh, councilor Walker said, uh,
the needs of the, the, uh, uh, children are
more than they were when I was on the board.
So it's different. It's, it's different times,
but I'm not really sure what the answer is.
And it's very difficult for me to say, okay,
school board come in at 3%,
because that would just completely devastate.
So it's easier for me to say, come to us
with some type of responsible plan and we'll let you know.
If you gotta go back to the drawing board
as we did last year, you guys went back to the drawing board
because it just didn't work.
Um, there's a lot of people out there
struggling with their taxes.
Um, and unfortunately this year,
the school budget isn't just the big thing
that we have to look at.
We have things on the city side that are gonna raise
or possibly raise taxes, uh, significantly.
And, and that is, uh, not gonna be a good thing, you know,
with the Pro Street Pump Station
and other projects that we have.
So my guidance to you is, uh,
not to go with A, B or C.
Yeah, I, I'm sorry.
Um, but, um, go back and figure out something else.
And if it means, uh, you know, obviously I don't want
a ton of reductions.
I, I, I mean, I, I believe in teachers. I'm pro teacher.
My daughter's a teacher, so I gotta say it.
She's watching probably.
So, uh, but no, I really am pro teacher, pro ed tech.
And, uh, I really believe that, uh,
you guys can, we can figure this out.
We have some time. It's January
and, uh, the sun going to panic mode yet.
So I am hearing if I were as a school board member,
or even school board chair, I think I would hear you say
don't, don't even go to six. It's gotta be lower.
That's what I'm hearing. So I want
to know I'm hearing correctly. Thank you.
It's gotta be, and I just wanted to add,
I remember last year it was three to 5%,
which falls at the four.
And because we knew what tax burdens were gonna be, they,
we, they can't really, you know, three,
3% is even, uh,
because people are looking at decreased enrollment
and the price keeps going up.
And so the expectation last year when we talked with you was
between three and like five was please keep it under five.
I think you even said that.
So that came out to about what happens with four,
which was higher than people really wanted to do.
I know one. Yeah, I know, I know,
I know. So, do you
wanna name your number
Three? Yeah,
you wanna go on the table?
Well, I, you counselor, I mean, excuse me.
School board member Holman. Yeah.
Sorry, I'm not my voice today,
but, um, this might not, I'm not,
it's not this not totally numbers issue,
but one thing we keep talking about is, you know
how there are different needs among students.
Sometimes I feel like we have a
couple stories to go with that.
What does that actually mean?
I think for the average person, like, what do you mean?
How are kids different? What is different?
I think that's helpful for people to understand, number one.
Number two, um, one of our problems,
and this is a problem of just of every city, is
that our method of funding ourselves
is extremely regressive.
That we're using property taxes.
And I'm like, where is the freaking sorry.
Creative thinking that we can somehow fund our cities
with something in addition.
I'm not saying we're gonna get rid of property taxes
entirely, but, you know, it drives everything.
It it is just, it, it's in the state.
Like, you know, like it's not like anybody here said, okay,
let's reevaluate and charge more taxes.
It's a state thing that kicks in, you know,
because real estate prices will not,
because that's a whole other,
don't get me talk about real estate.
But anyway, we won't. I thank you.
Please hold on, hold me back.
But it's just like, just where's the creative thinking?
Where's the creative thinking?
I never see any creative thinking around that whatsoever.
Zero. Just,
we're just gonna keep using property taxes to fund everything.
There's gotta be some like ask ai, I don't know.
Let's find the super intelligence maybe,
but like, like this is so regressive.
But that's a, that's a state funding issue.
It's nothing we can do. I know we could change that.
We can't do anything about that today.
Anyway. I don't need your feedback with my comment. Thank
You.
Alright everybody. We're having fun now.
Um, counselor Scott, are you prepared to talk
or Councilor Walker
or were you prefer to talk Counselor West
And let them go there? You have kids
In school. Alright,
You wanna go?
Thank you.
So, um, yeah, I, I appreciate everyone's comments
and I, I can't tell you how much I appreciate the work
of both the, the school staff and the school board.
And I don't envy for what is ahead of you,
especially after last year.
Um, I am, am closer to the sort of three to 6%.
Um, although I, I think there needs
to be a rather significant sort of right sizing
of the school, um, team
that is supporting the students given the reduction in
enrollment and what seems to not have been,
um, reduction in cost.
And I know that it's not a perfectly linear, oh, you know,
we need six pieces of pie
and next this, you know, next year we need less.
Um, but I do think
that we need a pretty significant right sizing
and, um, I know that we can't ask for a reduction
because of the enrollment changes
that have happened over the last several years,
but I do think that something in the sort of three to 6% is,
is more appropriate
and still, um, probably not necessarily stomachable by a lot
of residents of South Portland.
Um, and I just wanna say that in, in, in that I,
I think the most valuable, I know we're not here
to provide feedback on how you staff the department,
but I think the most valuable people are the people
who are facing students and supporting them.
Um, and they tend to be, uh, the least resource
or the least expensive in the staffing plan.
So I just wanted to put that on the record.
Um, but I think that's where I am in terms of numbers.
Thank you very much. Councilor Walker? Yes. You ready?
We can make Councilor West do it if you're not
Oh, I'll go. Um,
Oh, sorry. I didn't think
you were ready. Oh, no, it's fine.
All Councilor Pro don't
All jump at once. I
I, uh, I really appreciate the presentation,
so thank you for that.
Um, there are some ways that I wish the grass had a,
it's strange to say this
'cause they're pretty detailed, had a little more detail.
For example, I would've liked
to see maybe two different lines on the enrollment chart.
One that showed traditional student enrollment
and one that showed, um, students who are differently abled,
um, who have special needs enrollment.
Um, I think we would've seen those lines go in opposite
direction across somewhere.
Um, and then I would've liked to see maybe a line
or a separate color on the funding changes that showed
what amount of your funding changes was due
to the extra costs of supporting those students who are,
who are differently able.
Because I think that's significant.
I think the community needs to see that
that really last year was a, a, a strong driver of cost.
Um, and it's, it's hard to deal with.
Um, that all being said, um, I,
I appreciate the position you're in.
It, it, we are all sort of in that position
and, um, I I appreciate your solutions.
I just, I think we should also recognize, I completely agree
with Chair deis about we're not,
we don't really have neighborhood schools anymore.
Half the kids in Brown school, where my daughter goes,
it's right next to the library or bus in from Red Bank and,
and Brick Hill, they don't,
they don't have neighborhood schools.
My daughter's best friend for a long time was someone
who lived way far away from us and it was
provided some challenges and she ended up moving to Florida.
So now we have even different challenges.
But anyway, Um, but it,
but it, you know, it, so if the,
if the answer is consolidation, then
that may be something you want to take to another step.
And if the answer is being creative, maybe we need
to talk about other solutions that involve Mahoney.
Um, you know,
and I don't know, you know,
we're still moving through some of that.
We've made some decisions,
but some of that stuff is not going the
way we thought it was going to.
So we'll see where we are.
But, you know, one thing that that has,
and again, I I understand my goal is
to provide you a number, and I will,
and I'm not trying to micromanage at all,
but the, the thing I just, I feel like the community needs
to hear sort of where we are.
Um, and having a, a,
a pretty good deep history on all of this.
You know, one thing is that right now we have schools
that are, they're almost de facto segregated.
We've got 50% of the enrollment at, um, Skillings
that is people of color and new Mainers.
And then we have, what, 20 to 30, 27% of small school?
Correct. That is the same population.
I mean that's, that's really very frustrating.
And so consolidation and,
and moving towards that at least
can help solve that problem.
'cause we can create more equity amongst our student body
by providing, um, a a same location of shared, uh,
you know, resources that is, that are same for every student
or at least half the students if we're moving to two pre-K
to, to one and,
and a third of the students, if we're moving down
to just three and maybe further
consolidation should be considered.
But regardless, that's your job to consider those things.
And, um, hopefully you, you at least,
you know, you'd have my support.
Um, if those are answers that work, uh,
I would say that, you know, it's hard
to put a number on this, but I, I feel like I'm in the sort
of three to five, I mean, 4% is something that I would,
would, would send to the voters.
Um, it's, it's a really difficult thing.
One question I had on the city side
was do you have any estimate, if we were
to just have basically flatten all other funding
but still allow for COLA
and increase some benefits, what would our tax,
um, increase be?
You have have any idea?
No, I have to Well,
that'd be an interesting thing to, to find out.
Yeah. Because I think that, you know,
the whole thing is something
that we need, we need to manage.
Um, so that, that's where I'm at.
Um, so I gave you a number.
Thank you. Thank you.
She's got a question. I've got a print. Yes.
I, i, I just want to share as folks are thinking about
the numbers as we came into tonight
and now recalculating around some of the guidance, I,
I just want the city council and the board
and the public to hear this means upwards of
probably 50 staff reductions
that is not all coming out of one unit.
But again, I think just the magnitude
of the disruption that we will face if we are
right now, we're looking at about a $9 million
reduction if it's coming in at 3%.
Um, again, just want to name that in terms of what
that means to school staff and,
and the people who work for us.
Mm-hmm. We're punishing,
we're punishing our kids this decision right now. And all
Right, Ani, can we please hear from the rest of the
Counselors? Well, yeah, but
I mean, it's easy to sit here
and talk about numbers, but there's a real impact
to the numbers that you're giving us to work with.
And, and I appreciate you articulating the number of staff
because you know who's gonna suffer the most?
It's children and it's the children
who don't have the parents that are in this room.
And we understand that. Alright, everybody.
No, I want to hear from counselors
who haven't been heard from Please, counselor Walker.
So I actually build on what, um, was saying
and say the unpopular thing, which is I support, uh,
at least 6% tax increase.
And I understand that that is incredibly unpopular
and that there are gonna be people in my district
that are screaming and there are probably people in this
room that are glamor at right now.
And that's okay. Like, that's why I'm here.
I'm here to say the right thing,
maybe not the popular thing.
And I think that I hear from a lot of constituents
that say different things than,
than maybe my other counselors here
because the constituents that I talk to are saying, yeah,
I don't like the fact that it's gonna cost free more money,
but that's where we need to spend our money.
We need to spend our money on schools.
A lot of our tax taxpayers, our fellow taxpayers move
to South Portland because of those schools.
And if we start gutting education funding, then we're going
to lose those residents.
We're going to lose those taxpayers
to other school departments.
As a parent of a child who had a special, special education
path in, um, in middle school
and high school, it was extremely important
and she would not be where she is right now without it.
And so I recognize the significance of the investment
that those dollars provided.
Um, and again, to your point, there are, there are a lot
of parents in our district
that we don't hear from.
And if we just sit here and say, okay, we're gonna give a 3%
or 4% or a 5%, we are marginalizing a huge portion
of our population
and a huge portion of our, our student population
just by giving those numbers.
Um, I think that we need to,
we need to recognize it's a balance.
I don't envy your jobs at all.
And again, I know I'm saying something
that's incredibly unpopular, but we are where we are
and we have to spend this money.
Thank you. Councilor Walker. Councilor West.
Okay. I, again, I'd like to express my appreciation
to the schools and, and to all the parents in the room too.
It is very hard for me to understand
how if our enrollment is down 300 students since 200
to 2017, we have added 82 positions.
I mean, let's face it, we have more students
with special needs, but we're down 300 students
and we've added 82 positions.
I don't understand why we need six, um,
social workers in the school.
I, I if, if other high schools have two, I think it's great
that we have social workers.
That's actually something special that we have in Maine.
I, there are a lot of special things
that we have in our schools.
What you have to deal with is the increase.
There are many, many people in this community
who are elderly people who live on fixed incomes.
Their social security increase this year is 2.8%.
And so for me, I believe
that education is paying it forward
and that people try have to as much
as we can pay it forward.
And I would go with BI think I, I think
that we should, they came in with some specific provisions.
Um, B was a, as I if I'm saying it right,
and I understood it, right, even with a small print,
that was a 5.9%.
Is that right? Um, so that's,
that's where I'm coming from.
I think it's ter Oh, but I wanna say this my final point.
I don't think we can look at this as a one year thing.
I would like us this year to give some more guidance
and say, look, we want some kind of a plan.
We want to, if you have attrition,
we don't want you filling those positions.
We want you cutting some of these administrative costs and,
but, but remember to serve healthy food
and I, I think we've gotta take care of our students,
but we've got to face up when you look, the reason I wanted
that chart to stay up there is it just doesn't make sense.
And we knew those ARPA funds were gonna be,
we knew those COVID funds were going to be coming to an end.
We all knew it and we're dealing with it at the city.
It's the problem. You spend money
and then you have to deal, deal with the consequences.
So let's tighten the belt as much as you can this year,
but let's have an agreement
that next year you're gonna keep tightening it
because we've got to get this, uh,
the increase at leveling off a little bit.
And, and, and it looks like enrollment's gonna continue
to go down and maybe you have
to start thinking about shutting a school.
I don't know, uh, one of the grammar schools. I don't know.
But anyway, we've got some, we've got some major,
major challenges in our community right now,
but that's where I'm coming from.
Thank you. Thank you.
Can I offer something else or
Fast, quick, thanks.
I just wanna say, I think in terms of the charts
and sort of the explanations, you know,
as you consider our feedback coming back with the story
of the sort of, here, here is the difference
and the reason that it costs $30,000 today
to serve a student compared to $20,000 five years ago,
that sort of shift.
And us just not seeing the two, you know, parts
of the chart kind of collide in ways
that don't make sense to us.
Um, that that's really helpful.
And I, I think none of us disagree with Jess Walker
and everyone's point that students need more services is
because of a massive failure in many other systems across
our society that is forcing this support
to be needed in our schools.
And I would love to have all of that support
and more be in our schools
because there's such vital parts of our community
and we're just faced with this challenge.
So maybe some ways to tell the story
of why those lines diverge a little bit more
and how you're trying to serve those needs would be helpful
to make it more clear as
to why those lines diverge in the way that they do.
And that it's not just a perfect, uh,
linear representation maybe.
Thank you. Um, for, I'm gonna keep it short
miraculously because all
of my dedicated fellow counselors
and all of the people
who are selflessly serving on school board
and trying to figure this out have used all the good words.
They've expressed all the good ideas.
They've said how important it is that we educate
and support our students.
They are the future of South Portland.
They're the future of the world.
We can't just ignore that.
It's, it's too much of a fact. It's how our community works.
Um, and I'm gonna be a plan B
person, which puts us at about 6%.
And even that is going
to produce a real repercussion in the community.
I mean, we will see real change
and we will see people lose jobs
and we will see the consolidation of the schools
that some folks are nervous about
and some folks think may provide opportunities.
I will say that at the school meeting
that I attended last week,
I did hear many teachers talking more about opportunities,
um, in the consolidation model.
I, I, I feel so much the difference
between being a counselor and being a school board member.
Because when you are a counselor,
you really do hear across the community and you do hear
and see and meet with people who are on fixed incomes.
And as Counselor West said,
2.8% increase in social security.
That's it. And so I, I know that I am responsible for
thinking about those folks,
but where will we be in our community if we don't fund
public education?
So I can't see going less than plan B.
It's already a big cut and that's where I'm at.
So I have the composite of what folks said from council.
It's a range of between three to six, a few more,
probably leaning towards six, some leaning closer
to three or
Nine Or or nine.
Sorry, I didn't hear you. You said six
plus I think is what he said.
Sure. Um, so,
but we still need some guidance on the city side, including,
um, responses to the questions that we asked about,
I think they might know about, about new positions,
new programs, which seems kind of silly in this context
to ask, but I just want to kind of make sure
that we're all on the same page as well.
Can we finish the school and
Then, okay. Um,
well Councillor West is suggesting maybe we say
goodbye to our school friends,
but hey, you know, you showed us you.
Okay, nevermind. I'm not gonna go with that.
Um, now we'll do ours if you don't mind.
I think we're going to be giving some feedback if
you do realize that.
Has anyone opened the window? Is it snowing yet? Anyone?
Anyone? We need a weather person. Here's
The radar. I just was shown.
Nope. Okay. Scott, would it be okay if we said, you know,
if you were only here for the schools, you may now.
Alright, if you feel like you've seen the school discussion
that you came for
and you'd like to get home to your families, um,
please feel free to exit quietly.
We are going to continue the rest
of our discussion. Thank you.
Thank you. Bye. I wanna get home to my family.
This was good. That's good luck with people's good,
especially because of the weather.
Then we can focus a little better also.
Alright, do you mind as we go back to our seats?
Yeah, let's go back. Go back to seats. Okay.
Just about the council.
Are you?
Yeah. Right. It's not like,
hey.
Nope, there's not
Really a way.
What was that? Well,
yeah, we've been
Local option sales tax,
Local Option sales tax. That's the
Best way.
It's all to say, say
no.
Yeah. Legislature basically tells we can't have a local
income tax, we can't have a local sales tax.
This legislature this out,
we have that at the state after the city council actually
Was one of their goals this past year.
So there was legislation introduced to fail
continuing that, working with
Like MMA mayors coalition to get
A, We're gonna get
going again.
Claire Coleman.
Alright. Our city manager
started us out this evening asking us for feedback
and we have failed to give it to him.
So we need to remedy that.
I can only get my computer to work.
I can see what the questions are.
Maybe you'll help us, Scott.
Yep. So just any general guidance you have,
percentages like you've given to the school is great.
And then there were some questions tied to that too.
Are there are several requests for new positions.
Um, some of them can pay for themselves.
So if you look at like parks
and rec fees, we've got more programming
so we need to add someone else.
I'm just making that example up.
Then there's others that, yeah, I, sorry, we're gonna need
to raise taxes or use tiff revenue that now
that can be used for something else.
And so it would be good to have your guidance on that.
And similarly for any new programs that staff may want
to propose, um, if you have any thoughts on that
and that will help the budget, uh,
that gets crafted over the next month that we bring back
to you for the city side.
Right now, even though it's kind of an artificial number
with department requests, um, where's Ellen?
We're, we're at about a 15% tax increase on the city side.
Now it's always that high to start with.
I don't want people thinking that's gonna be anywhere near
what we bring to you.
Um, and we, you know, we don't need
to make cuts like the school is,
we're in a different situation.
Some of those are more wants than they are in need.
So we'll, we'll go through the process
of trimming those down through the next
few months, but, uh, next month.
But that's where we're at.
Thank you. Okay.
Um, unless, oh, councilor
Pride, I was gonna go Yay.
Start us off. We love
That. Alright,
We already took all the public comment.
You gonna say yes? Okay.
Yes, because I kept saying
to folks you can comment on the city as well.
Yeah. Um, so drop the wants is sort of my first comment.
Um, I am not in favor of granting new position requests
or new program requests.
Um, and the question about maximum tax increase, I mean,
I was hard on the schools.
I'm gonna be hard on the city.
I'm gonna say 3%, but, you know, I'm just one counselor
and I know that's hard, but I'd like to see it.
I, Anyone
else want to go next? Councilor Walker.
I'll go. Um, I do think that we need to be
as revenue positive as possible.
So if there are new position requests
and they can be tied to an increase in revenue, then I think
that is something that we can explore.
I also would support funding,
fully funding the two positions
that we're losing the ARPA funding for,
because I think especially, um, actually both of those,
you know, purchasing and also our communications director
are directly tied to both funding and engagement.
Um, and I think that they're crucial positions that we need
to make sure that we fund.
Um, I find, I, I think it would be hard to say right now
that no, I wouldn't support any new programs
or any new positions.
I would just say that we need to be
as revenue positive as possible.
Thank you. Next Councilor West. Thank you.
Uh, I'm not open to any new position requests,
even if they are funded by non-property tax revenue
because there's always other things we
can do with that revenue.
I think we have. On top of that, I think we have
to have a hiring freeze for anything other than police,
fire and public works.
I am not open to new program requests from departments
and I would, I would go with 4%,
but here's something else that I wanna say, um, which may,
and I hope you can see through that it's not inconsistent.
We have got to, as a community
start accruing a capital building fund.
We have been just turning our backs on our capital
needs and in an effort to try
to keep our property taxes down,
I had the manager do a brief calculation of
if we were to try
to accrue $2 million a year in a capital building fund,
that would cost the average homeowner
of a $600,000 house about $160 a year.
I'm sorry if people in the community think that's too much
to ask, but we have got to maintain our,
uh, buildings.
We can't, the reason we're in such a bad shape of, with,
with all our buildings and people coming out
that it's gonna cost us 194 million to replace everything.
And I know the voters won't go for that, is
that we haven't done enough in the past
and we can't keep putting this off
on the shoulders of the future.
So I would like us to try to start this year with a capital
building fund and a commit commitment.
Of course, I won't be here that long
and the council can always change it,
but a commitment to try to add
to it every year in the amount of $2 million.
Um, so that's my, then another thing, oh two two more.
These ideas are free though.
I'd like to try to do everything we can
to encourage volunteerism in the community.
I mean, people, I saw
that we have a halftime library position, some kind
of library aid that's open.
I thought, well, I'm sorry,
but I think we should freeze that position.
But let's try to see if there are people in the community
that enjoy libraries that would like to donate some time
and could possibly help fill that position and,
and other kinds of things too.
Then also, I don't know if we have some kind of a policy
or procedure that people can suggest people
who are both employed by the city
and live in the city, uh, suggest money saving ideas.
I mean, some people, some cities do that on a,
so you can do it anonymously if you wanna squeal on
somebody, but then some of them have a, a sort of a contest
that you get a free pizza
or something if you make the best
suggestion for how to save money.
So I, I would hope that we could try to do that
and basically try, try
to approach our budgeting in a positive frame of mind.
It's a tremendously difficult year
and we are all doing our best up here.
And so it's, I I just think if we can, as one
of the school board members say, we're all in this together,
let's all use our skills
and talents to try to do the best we can to have continue
to have our great community.
Thank you very much. Counselor Matthews
or Counselor Scott or Councilor Coleman.
Councilor Matthews. You look like,
Uh, first, well it's, it is kind of hard
to say you put a hiring freeze on anything.
We don't have any information.
I mean, bring it forward and if we don't like it,
we get time to say no anyway.
So I mean, for example,
if somebody brought forward a underwriter, a grant writer,
excuse me, a grant writer and that would've pay for itself.
I mean that's, you know, that's something
that we didn't have that information tonight.
And do you want to,
Do you want No, I just wanna
explain what I mean by hiring freeze. You okay?
I want hear Are you finished? No, keep going. That's
So, uh, you know, I would like to stick out around a three
to 4%, but again,
I want to keep it down low.
But if you, if one
of these departments brings something forward
that it's gonna be a money maker
or save us money in the long run,
obviously we want to take a look at it.
So I I don't agree with, uh,
not bringing those positions forward.
Especially if it was example, a grant writer,
You wanna explain your hiring freeze.
Yeah, I just wanna clarify what I meant by hiring freeze.
I mean during the entire year, if there's an,
if somebody leaves and we have attrition
that we won't fill those positions unless,
unless the manager comes to the council and says, you know,
because of this reason and that reason.
I think it's imperative that we fill the position
that's a hiring freeze
and we've got to do that if we're gonna keep
with it not be the same problem
that the school district has.
May I ask a clarifying question?
Are you including department heads in that
The manager can always ask?
Maybe there's a way to consolidate departments, for example.
Alright, thank you. This side of our table.
I'm happy to go. Thank you.
Um, I think I agree with most counselors that, uh,
I don't know that I can support
new positions or new programs.
Um, I would be open to considering
positions or programs that were not covered
by property tax revenues,
but I think that would have to be very sort of
fact specific I think in reviewing the larger budget.
Um, and my concern around that is that if it's a, a sort
of full-time permanent or full-time permanent like position
and it's funded by something for a year, there's sort
of the expectation that we then need to fund it.
And so if it's a, you know, a six month thing
that can be covered by a grant or a temporary
or an internship or something that does not have the, um,
the sort of obligation at the end
to then bring it under the tax, um, base, I would, I think
that's where my consideration would be more open
to those types of things.
Um, and I think I'm probably in similar
to the school board in the sort of three
to 6% range.
I'd love to say three to four,
but I think there's, i, I don't know
what budget in the world goes up by three
or less these days.
And so I think it's probably more reasonable
to hopefully be in the four to five range.
So maybe three to five.
Councillor Coleman. Thank you very much.
Councillor Scott. And
Three to five.
And I do know that we have actually several
grant writers and I know that they even discuss
among themselves different departments.
Um, because sometimes, uh, a, a department can,
one department can get more than the o you know, it's like
that people have been working together,
Julie's been doing really well
in making money come down from the sky
with a lot of hard work.
Um, but I've hiring freeze
or no new projects um,
because politically things are kind of
really precarious at this time
and we have to really think about being, uh, very careful
with the money that we're spending.
So, three to five, happy with four.
Thank you very much. Um, Yeah, Natalie, oh,
Can I clarify something that I maybe was ambiguous?
I do support the two positions that we have
that have been funded with half of the federal funds too,
that we need to keep those. I I don't know if that was
I do too, by the way.
I was, I kind of assumed that, but thank you for clarifying.
'cause it's always, I don't consider those new positions.
Yeah. Right. That's, yep.
Okay. Lots of clarification. It's helpful.
Um, open to new position requests and new program requests.
Yes. For the reasons stated pretty much by counselors,
Matthews and Walker.
Let's hear what the departments have to say.
Let's hear if there is a reason that,
for example, a, um, maybe we added
to our economic development department
and that was going to help us bring in revenue
or something like that.
I think that a budget process is exactly for hearing
what your, the staff ideas are, what their visions are,
and we then make the decision, is
that something we've never thought about?
And it makes a ton of sense
and our community would support it.
So yes or not so?
No, but I don't want
to completely shut down creativity and ideas.
Um, and then
I do like the Capital Building fund idea very much.
Um, I think that our future counselors will thank us
for it if we're able to put something like that in place.
Not just our future counselors, but our future residents.
Um, so if we can figure that one out, that'd be great too.
I realize there's a little bit of magic wand thinking here,
but we'll hash it out during our discussions.
Maximum tax rate increase, other people are saying three
to five with a lovely focus on four.
I guess I'll go with five.
So the guidance we have is three to five.
There's seems to be a majority.
If position maybe could generate revenue,
then we'd consider it.
Um, programs maybe not as clear.
Um, just one thing, without getting into specifics,
we talk about existing, uh, those two existing positions
that, that ARPA funding as we've known for, for, for years,
would, would, would run out.
Those are continuing.
We have a situation too, we have,
where we've had a long time grant funded position.
I don't want to get into the details right now
that grant funding is running out too.
Would you consider that a new position if it now had
to fall entirely on the tax rate taxes and,
and, uh, um, salary benefits or,
or is that something that you would expect to continue?
And if you want, we can talk about that more
during the budget process, but some guidance on
that would be helpful as well.
I wouldn't consider it a new position,
but I would be open to talking
about it more during the budget
Process. Okay.
Anyone else wanna respond to that? Anyone?
Councilor Waz I'D on camera. I just wanna hear more details.
Okay. More specifics.
Yeah, it sounds well, I, I would be on the,
let's hear about it
and it, you know, I understand that doesn't sound new.
It wouldn't be new, but the way of funding it would be new.
So let's hear more during the process.
Okay. Thank you.
Okay. Um, you have what you need? Yep.
Um, we promised a climate resilience
overlay zone workshop.
Everyone let us welcome Milan, Nevada,
our planning director.
We're actually, Julie, you're gonna kick things off. Oh.
So we have our sustainability director, Julie Rosenbach,
planning director Milan, Ida here.
They're gonna tag team on the, uh, initial presentation,
which, um, just forewarn everyone.
We'll probably total over a half an hour just
because there's a lot to this.
Um, and then ultimately, uh,
after council, if you've had time to process, you're,
you're being asked four questions, um,
which I'll let Milan get to when he's at the end
of the presentation because they'll make a
lot more sense when they do.
Of course, if you've already read the presentation
materials, you have an understanding of
what those are and will be.
Um, and, uh, uh, and so we'll go from there.
I have to switch the, uh,
Have To switch the,
And I am sorry that it is
late-ish in starting this,
but I don't know that it could have been helped.
If you see anything in your presentations that strike you
as something you could summarize
that you perhaps had not planned to summarize,
thank you in advance.
Is there an echo between us here?
This is like way far back.
Alright, so Julie, you gonna kick us
off? I think we're ready to
Go when and if not, uh, no, I got some
who double booked the workshop.
You, me, I think I inherited this from the last mayor.
So we got the flicker on this side. It should,
I gotta go grab water. Oops.
Hold on.
Alright, can
You guys hear me Well?
I can hear you, but you might wanna keep shouting.
Okay, I'm gonna keep shouting. Apologies.
Um, I'm a little under the weather, so bear with me.
I'm gonna, um, I'm just going to, I have like,
We appreciate your valiant attempt.
Sorry. Goodness me. It's, it's stressful.
Okay. I'm not even touching it.
Okay,
We're gonna set that up.
I'm gonna stand over here. Okay.
I'm gonna spend like six minutes just setting the stage for
what, before Milan talks about the cross.
I know that, um, some of the counsel have been at
multiple events that we've held over the last, um,
year plus, but some others have it.
And so I want to make sure that, um, that everybody, um,
has the context for what we're talking about.
So, um, I'm gonna just talk about why we're proposing this.
I swear six minutes, councilor Matthews.
Alright, why we're proposing this,
this climate scenarios we're planning for
and how we're using modeling.
Then Milan is gonna go into the whole proposed framework
for our frauds and the discussion questions for you.
Okay. So here's your project orientation. So,
Um, the idea behind Climate resilience zoning
Has a strong background.
Our current comprehensive plan that was adopted in 2012
has a strategy, has a policy to manage the use
of flood prone areas to reduce the risk of property
and environmental damage.
So we've been doing this for more than a decade.
It's just that that was very general
because we didn't have all of the information
that we now have over the past 10 plus years.
So our 2020, um, one climate feature plan
that was adopted in 2020, um,
gave us way more comprehensive data on the risk intervention
for, for social flooding.
So our latest data
and projections clearly show that
as climate change testifies, we're gonna face
a lot more risks, as you know, from sea level rise
and storm surge and higher, um, storm water, um,
more intense storms and higher heat.
Um, one climate future also has a specific strategy
that says, we think that zoning is a key strategy
to address these risks in new development.
So I'm gonna skip on page 2 0 4 in one climate future
where it talks specifically about the risk we're facing
and what, um, what climate resilience zoning can do.
But I'm gonna summarize it like this.
So one climate future has a specific, um, policy
around developing zoning for new development
that speaks to climate resilience.
In fact, one, one of the things I forgot to say was
that when we were developing our plan,
our consultants developed an entire memo, um,
on different frameworks for climate resilience over lazo
and different ways that you can do it,
because we knew that this would be important moving forward.
So one climate feature set, um, a strategy
to develop climate resilience overlay zoning,
and also two scenarios for 2100 commit
to manage scenario at 3.9 Q2 local rise
and a, we call us prepare
to manage scenario at 8.8 feet of sea level rise.
So the state's climate action plan main won't wait,
also adopted those same scenarios in the first plan,
um, in 2020.
Okay? And now in 2024, main, um, science
and technical community updated, um, their scenarios
and, um, we updated the main role wait, climate action plan.
Okay. With this update,
you guys can see it like flashing, right?
Yeah, yeah. No problem. Not, not, not. Okay.
Um, you're doing great.
There's a lot going on. Okay.
With the update of the manual weight in 2024,
they updated the projections as well.
And what they said was that the, the commit
to manage the 3.9 feet of sea level rise, um,
remains within the statistically likely range for 2100.
The 8.8 feet, the prop, prepare, manage, um,
simply got pushed back, um, two decades to 2120.
So, um, both of these, um,
yep, both of 'em are still commit to manage
and prepare to manage, but the, um, 8.8 p got pushed
to 2100 in terms of projection.
Okay. The updated comp plan, which is still in draft,
includes a policy that new development will prepare for
at least 3.9 feet of sea level rise for, um,
development generally,
and 8.8 feet of sea level rise for critical,
um, buildings and services.
Um, both of these requirements include, um,
the 1% chance storm
or the so-called, should I just unplug it?
I don't know. Uh, they think
it's a software issue in the back.
We might try run.
I sent the slides to you, Scott, if you want
to try it from your terminal,
Go there.
But you can keep speaking Julie, I mean,
if you feel like you can, that
I'll, I'll keep talking.
Thank you. Apologies. It's, um,
Okay.
Okay. Both of the requirements, um, for 3.9
and 8.8 feet include a 1% chance storm
or the hundred year storm.
And in the comp plan, there's, um,
a language about prioritizing human health and safety.
Alright?
Doesn't matter if it's not Mine. Okay. This is a,
This Is a visual I wanna talk about.
No, I never got One. The levels of sea level,
the two scenarios that we're planning for
and why we chose, why we landed on 3.9 feet
and why we landed on 8.8 feet.
So the first thing I wanna say, if you could see the slide,
there's a low level scenario and it starts with that,
and then it goes up to different scenarios.
And we know that the low level scenario
is off the table today.
Even if we stopped, um, um,
releasing greenhouse gas emissions, um,
we're gonna feel the effects of the emissions
that we've already released for, for centuries to come.
And that we know that in almost every scenario we see, no,
it's that we're gonna meet and exceed
the low level scenario.
So it's not worth planning for
because we know that it's gonna happen
and we need to plan for more realistic scenarios.
So we chose 3.9 feet of sea level rise
because it has the highest probability of happening,
it has the highest probability of happening by 2100.
So that is our commit to manage for sure.
So 8.8 feet of sea level rise is, um,
Prepared a minute, 8.8 feet of sea level, thank you,
8.8 feet of sea level rise.
It is, um, again, been pushed back two decades to 2120.
Even with that extended timeframe,
it has a low probability of happening.
It's sort of the worst case scenario. Okay?
We think it's important to plan for 8.8 feet
of sea level rise because even though it's the worst case
scenario and it it,
and it has a low probability of happening,
it's plausible that it would happen.
And we know this because we had a storm in January
of 2024 that had the same low probability of happening.
It's doing the same thing. And yet it happened
because of this perfect confluence of, um, you know,
a southeasterly storm that hit, it wasn't even a, a,
a 1% chance storm.
It wasn't even a hundred year storm.
It was a, a minor major storm,
but it hit during exactly the highest astronomical tide.
And so it had greater impacts.
So we believe that
because, um, we're, we wanna use 8.8 feet
for critical infrastructure
that should be protected at a higher level.
So that's that. It also, um,
the other reason why we think 8.8 feet is good for, um, um,
critical infrastructure is that these types
of buildings have a longer lifespan.
And it's, and it's, um, it's entirely realistic
for a building that was built now
to be in existence in a hundred years from now,
which is a timeframe of the 8.8 feet of sea level rise.
So those two things, low probability, high impact,
and timeframe of the buildings.
Thanks for bearing with me here. Mm-hmm. Alright.
Um, so again, I said we included the 1% chance storm.
It's also called the 100 year storm, um,
for more sensitive land uses.
And Milan will talk more about this,
but what I want to say is that this aligns
with FEMA modeling and, um,
when we talk about the a hundred year storm, there's a lot
of misconceptions about it.
But, um, you may have heard,
if you could just go one form.
Yeah, sorry. Yep. Thank you. Perfect.
Right, that's where we are. That's perfect. Okay.
So the 1% chance storm, so this aligns with schema modeling
and because, um, of probabilities,
which I don't understand very well, I do know
that over the life of a mortgage of the life of 30 years
of a building, um, there's like a 26% chance
that you will encounter a hundred year storm.
Storm patterns are also changing.
So I feel like, um, we feel like it's prudent
to include this type
of storm in our modeling, in our scenarios.
We also know, like I just said, that even, even,
even the smaller storms can have a significant impact
depends on the tides.
Okay. Now, so that,
oh, um, next slide please.
Okay. So how, in terms of how most, in terms of
how we're using modeling, um, to inform our decisions
and to base our, um, our planning on science.
Um, so traditionally most communities have used
the FEMA flood maps.
That's what everyone is, um, um, knows the most
because they've been used since the
1960s when they were created.
So they're great for, um, regulatory decisions for, um,
insurance decisions.
The one, and they've got a lot of detail in them,
but the one thing that these FEMA flood maps don't
do is look forward.
They use historical data.
And so what we've done is we've developed, um, um,
our hydrodynamic model, we've developed, um, uh, the state,
uh, and Noah have developed, um, like a decade
or so ago, started, uh, decade
or so ago, started developing, um, you know, um,
sea level rise maps.
And these were called bathtub models
because they were mostly just
how high will the water get water in water out, um,
with sea level rise.
But they didn't lack, they lacked any storm data
or any wave action or anything like that.
So they gave us part
of the picture just like FEMA gave us a
really detailed part of the picture.
But for past storms, then we had the bathtub models.
And then you probably know
that we've developed the hydrodynamic models
with the Army Corps of Engineer.
We're using all of these three models to inform our mapping
and modeling because we get, um, we get a piece
of the, um, whole picture from each of these storms.
So this is, um, our modeling on our webpage
and it shows you the average daily high tide in red,
the highest astronomical tide in, um, yellow,
and then, um, a hundred year storm in blue.
And that I wanna just point out
that the highest astronomical tide is, the highest is,
is the outside range of that.
So anything before that is sort of your, um,
average higher high tides.
Okay? Okay.
So we have these models we can show, this is the, oh,
what I wanna say is that you're gonna see a lot
of different colors in these maps.
Different mapping and modeling has different colors.
It's a little confusing and I apologize about that.
But we couldn't change the coloring to all match up
for this presentation.
But even though we have these scenarios
and this shows the extent of where the water is going to be
with each of these events, it doesn't show
that depth of the water.
Even with these models, it's really hard to predict, um,
the way water will react because of our tides,
because main has such big tides
because there's 10 feet between average, between your, um,
um, your low tide and your high tide.
And there can be as much as 12 feet.
And so if a storm hits at low tide, like not that big a deal
because storm surge is probably not gonna be bigger than
that, um, 10, then that 10 foot difference, if it hits
that high tide, then it has much more significant impact.
Okay.
Cooper, I also just want to take this opportunity.
Can you go forward one slide
To show you while we have these maps up,
that the left is 3.9 feet of sea level rise,
which is the intermediate level scenario,
and the right is 8.8 feet of sea level rise.
So the storm, the storm, um, inundation that we're planning
for with 3.9 feet in blue on the left hand slide is
where we're gonna see our average daily high tides
and more at 8.8 feet.
Now the big caveat in that is that
that is without any interventions.
So hopefully over the next few decades we will be able to,
um, sort of intercede
and do take measures that that can change this outcome
because it's a pretty significant outcome.
Okay, last slide for me. Thanks for bearing with me. Okay.
So, Um,
we usually measure things in sort
of tidal datos mean lower low water, you know,
mean has two tides a day, two low tides,
two high mean lower low water, um, um, mean sea level
mean higher high water and highest astronomical tide.
These are all title dms.
And so for the purposes of, um, the, um,
overlay zoning, we translated these into, um, north
American vertical datum, uh, of 1988.
It's NAV D 88, that's a land-based zero
that surveyors use engineers use.
And it's a static, um, measurement so that we can, um,
discuss, um, design flood elevations for buildings.
And so you're gonna see that this is the chart
that we use throughout in order to translate those maps of
where water will be into, um, policy that we can,
um, develop for, um, new development.
So the first you'll see red is your mean high or high water.
That's your average daily high tide.
Um, yellow is the highest astronomical tide
and blue is, um, the one, the a hundred year storm.
And then the next tranche is
with 3.9 feet of sea level rise.
And the next traunch is with 8.8 feet of sea level rise.
So this is how is there a, um,
so this is for example, and I can't read it, um,
but if you've seen a storm, um,
usually people talk about sea level, uh, about, um,
you know, um, flood inundation relative to mean low
or low water, that's sort of the common vernacular.
So in this case, the mean lower low water,
I can't read it got translated into a different number in
nav in in nav D 88.
And so I put a line in that slide, um, so that you can see
that when the storm was talked about in one number,
it got translated into NAV D 88
and it was actually, um,
just a little bit higher than the 1% chance storm that was,
um, predicted because it hit the
highest astronom almost died.
So this is where I wanna leave you.
Thank goodness Milan is gonna take over.
Thank you for bearing with me. Good.
Um, thank you very Much. I'll answer any
questions better than
Thank you and I, I hope people can
see 'cause it is interesting.
The very last column makes it real by comparing the C level
to places that we know in the area.
You'll see this slide again. Okay. With more context.
While we have a transition anyway, can we try
to see if the flicker is resolved or, um,
Yeah, we think this thing here is going,
so we're gonna have to probably get a new one, but yes.
Do you want to give it a try?
Give it a try.
Shh. No, talk loud.
Uh, so Julie's gonna say later
that I'm gonna sabotage her portion,
but I swear it was not, it's a mixer problem
if this thing stays, uh, the number that, uh,
Julie was just referring to earlier is 9.3 feet.
NAVD 88 is equivalent to that 14
and a half feet mean low low water that others, uh,
representation of the height
of water in January, 2024 represents.
So these numbers just shift.
Um, and NAVD 88 is our sort of global zero.
That's, that's why we're trying to use that
as a standard metric.
The feet
and those heights are gonna make a little more sense when we
start talking through what, what are the implications in
zoning in a couple of slides.
So bear with me here. Uh,
the cross coastal resilience overlay zone
is an overlay zone.
It'll sit as a floating set of regulations on top
of our existing zoning districts
or how we amend those districts once
the comp plan is adopted.
So we will say through normal zoning,
we like these kinds of activities here.
We want, uh, setbacks and lot sizes
and all the other things to be such and such.
Um, and that'll be our general development framework.
And then because flooding is irrelevant in certain areas,
there will be this overlay zone that
for those certain areas, um, sets out additional standards
to, uh, adapt and manage floods.
The cross, like all
of our zoning ordinance sections needs a purpose statement.
It helps define and set, set some organizational principles
to the, uh, rest of the standards.
We've put those here on the page, you have them in the memo.
I'm not gonna belabor them.
I think they're pretty transparent.
But, uh, one thing I do want to highlight is
that public health safety and general welfare was a really
critical concept that we baked
and we vetted some of the recommendations
that you're gonna see tonight with that
as a sort of principle.
And then the second is
that I wanna highlight is the proportional to the risks.
Um, and as Julie has just been emphasizing,
these are projections and we're looking for the future.
One of the most difficult things
of handling sea level rise is that you're trying
to manage risk today for a future scenario
because decisions you make today span into that scenario.
So time is as much of a factor as it is just
where the water is and whatnot.
So we are looking, we look at snapshots
and try to understand where that risk level goes.
So those are really important concepts.
We will spend much, much less time tonight.
Um, talking about high heat,
it's a much simpler issue to deal with, I think.
Um, but we do have some principles for that.
And at the end of the slide, I do just have a couple
that highlight what we're recommending to do with high heat.
If you have any thoughts on it,
please uh, add those at the end.
Most of this is focused on the flooding.
So the or, uh, overlay zone flooding framework.
When does it apply? Julie talked about those projections of
what we think we need to prepare for.
The worst or outermost
of those projections is the 8.8 feet plus storm.
That's the one that sets the biggest area
of impact if we're gonna be preparing.
And as a result, that is what defines where we think we need
to be talking with developers about flooding.
Um, so there's rationale
that I think Julie's explained about why 8.8 plus the storm
is important to think about for those very,
very critical uses that were
both involve significant public investment
that the community really relies on.
And that last a long time.
And if we're gonna plan for those things, this is the area
where we need to plan them.
So this is the area where flooding
conversations need to happen.
Any development that's in those shaded blue areas
of our town, uh, have some potential
to experience an 8.8 plus storm flood condition.
And they'll have to talk about flooding.
Now, what they actually propose to do
will determine whether they need
to actually change their development plans
to prepare for that flooding.
If someone proposes a parking lot, they're probably not,
they, they will definitely under this, uh,
draft plan, not need to do anything.
But if someone wants to propose a hospital,
we're gonna have a different conversation.
Okay? So there's gradients depending on what the project is,
we do define what we think should be exempted from the
cross, categorically,
because like a parking lot, it's okay if it gets wet.
Um, and then other things we want to prohibit categorically
because under no scenario do we wanna see certain kinds
of activity, um, within areas where there's flood risks.
And frankly, there's other reasons why
we wouldn't want to include those.
Uh, when you see that list of prohibited uses,
so the cross flooding framework looks at three key things.
What is the occupancy?
What do you want to put into the
structure that you're proposing?
And is it high, moderate or low sensitivity to flooding?
Can it get wet and be okay?
Is it okay if it's down for a couple
of days while the storm's here and then back up and running?
Does it have the ability to do that?
So there is a gradient to how you wanna fill the buildings.
The second is whether you're proposing a new construction
situation or you have an
existing building that you're working with.
The, uh, risk mitigation there is different.
Um, and we need to be careful to, to plan
for both scenarios and then scale.
Are we talking about a, a small shed
or are we talking about a large hospital?
That's also important.
You'll see how that plays out in a minute.
We really have two solutions
that we're proposing under this ordinance.
There's the one that's off the shelf.
If you do this, you're good.
As far as flooding is concerned, is preparing for flooding.
And that is to elevate that use above
where we project the flood waters to be.
So elevation is your off the shelf solution that the,
is sort of the default standard that we will accept
as being flood adaptive development under this ordinance.
And the second option is if elevation is not quite right
because your use is unique.
Um, we want to provide some flexibility for people
to bring forward creative, but equally effective solutions.
Okay, so you've got an off the shelf standard, run with it
and design for it or show us something better
and we'll hear you out and there's a process to allow that
to play itself out too so we can learn and do this together.
Alright, flood sensitivity of the uses that are proposed.
I told you the low, moderate high is the scaling
that we wanted to use and we assign them
to the different flood scenarios.
High uses, like I mentioned, are things like hospital
to know that a little bit better.
And what we ended up putting into the high sensitivity
category, we're looking at three or four key things.
One is these, uh, uses have
to be accessible to the community.
They're essential for people's daily operations
and it will be, uh, critically impactful
to the whole community if they're down.
Okay. Um, they will also have a very long lifespan, um,
a lifespan that puts them into high probability scenarios
that today appear, um, really, uh, low likelihood
until we're 40, 50, 60 years later and we've got ice melt
and we've got all the other compounding effects of,
of flooding that are leading to sea level rise.
So those are kind of the key concepts of
what puts something into a high sensitivity category.
Some examples of that, you have a whole attachment on this,
but some examples are those critical government offices,
fire police stations, schools, convention centers,
large gathering areas, places
where there's mobility impaired, uh, inhabitants and so on.
Moderate sensitivity categories are those
where they have a slightly left, uh, lower lifespan.
Um, and there might be buildings
that will be revamped in a 50, 60 year timeframe
and then can reassess
and prepare for the new flooding
conditions at that timeframe.
And they're also more localized concern.
It's not a whole community issue, it's a small amount
of displacement that can be managed
and um, they have to prepare for a little bit less.
So those are, um, uses that'll cycle more in the timeframe
of when we have to prepare for the worst of the flooding.
So in this category, it's pretty small,
but it's really all the residential uses up to 10 units
before you get to, uh, the 11th unit.
That would put you, when you get to the 11th unit,
that would put you into a large amount of displacement,
high, uh, sensitivity.
And then, then there's the low sensitivity uses.
These are maybe have a shorter or medium term timeframe.
Uh, by design, there's significant investment in those
properties within like a 25 to 50 year timeframe.
If the use was down, people might be upset
or bothered by it, but they're not really not having access
to critical things that they need to survive and function.
Um, so their wants, not needs maybe.
Um, now obviously, you know, if this is a business
and their business is down, that can be severely impactful
to one business owner of course,
and we wanna be sensitive to that.
But, uh, it's not gonna cause community-wide disruption.
Uh, some examples of that would be, um, r
and d facilities, retail theaters, offices, um,
especially in the days of, uh, remote work, um,
small scale lodging, restaurants, that kind of thing.
We have some categories that are exempt.
I told you about the parking lots. This is in that category.
Things that are water dependent or need to be in
or near water, ground floor u um,
access is essential in cer certain businesses.
Those would also be, uh, exempt if you need to be able
to move truck in and out.
Materials on the ground. Logistics type businesses
that would be exempt
because they, they functionally need to be at grade.
Uh, some examples, telecom towers is not occupied.
Um, cultural facilities, manufacturing,
light industrial facilities, again because of that at grade
and logistics, transportation.
So how high do structures have to elevate in order
to be prepared for that flooding scenario
that's applicable to them?
We need to understand a term I'm gonna be using here
and uh, the acronym is DFE.
It's the design flood elevation.
It's what we want the structures to be designed to
because we think that that will keep them dry
and able to operate when those flood conditions occur.
This is a little schematic
that just shows grade at the bottom.
It's gonna move and shift at,
depending on the site you're at, we're projecting
that certain amount of flooding will happen based on our
best modeling and we'll continue to update that modeling.
And then so, uh, just like with fema,
we'll add on an extra foot to reach the design flood.
So we expect the flood to be here,
but you have to design to be just above that.
We included a one foot buffer and that's for the variability
and the unknowns that, uh, we have.
Again, FEMA does the same thing. It's called the freeboard.
Uh, so that's the extra little height that we'll ask for
to be even more secure.
This building on the left is a schematic
of a house that you might see today.
It's typical, it's got a basement,
it has its utilities in the basement at grade parking.
Um, it has that air condenser
for air conditioning on the ground next to the house.
This is very common, um, with a standard that establishes
that this house must be a DFE two.
It's this new elevation level.
It's just saying that the ground floor residential uses need
to be up at that DFE level.
That's where it needs to start.
And this schematic, I think is pretty representative of
what we have in South Portland.
Yes, buildings will need to elevate,
but we're not talking about houses on 20 foot stilts.
Okay? These houses are already being built today
and have been built for the last several decades
that have matched the picture on the right.
Um, and this zoning will move more development
or all future development in that direction.
Um, one critical difference though is with critical systems
that support that use.
So in a home, that's your boiler for water.
That's your, uh, HVAC systems.
Typically we put those in a basement.
If you have a basement, um,
or at grade, if you're for instance,
you have a garage, you put 'em in your garage.
That's common practice
because they're just sort of the utility
spaces going forward.
Those things are essential to make
that home livable in the winter.
Provide your heating cooling, uh, in the summer.
They will also need to be safe so that they're functional.
Um, so it applies to both where that occupancy exists
and the things that are needed to make
that occupancy possible.
They'll also have to meet that DFE meeting.
DFE is a first floor elevation issued in South Portland.
I mentioned that this is not going
to create houses on 20 foot stilts when I'm just trying
to emphasize here is that in virtually all cases
where we'll see development in South Portland within the
cross, we're talking about a solution
of elevation within that first floor.
We don't expect to see any scenarios where someone has
to meet cross and they'll have
to relegate the first two floors of that structure
to something that can be flooded.
So voids of two stories are not something that we have
to see in South Portland.
Our tides and projections
for flooding are just not that high.
Um, and it makes it very, very attainable, um,
from an architecture and design standpoint.
Here's some visuals that help explain that.
Um, we've got, these are familiar hopefully storefronts, uh,
in, uh, in the city.
Um, we've got our Verina cafe right
around the rotary in Mill Creek for instance.
That's a three foot elevation.
That building's been there for over a hundred years.
They just did that for architectural reasons
and possibly back in the day to avoid the dirt
that was coming off of the dirt roads.
Um, so these are structures
that are gonna be very familiar to South Portland.
I I want to emphasize that point.
We've been vetting the standards that we're talking about
with contractors, developers, architects, designers.
This is not reaching for the moon.
Uh, these are very attainable things.
Alright, so back to Julie's graph on all these projections
for, um, various sea level rises.
This is where those sensitive use categories land
in the projections that we have.
So number one is those low sensitivity uses uses
that can get wet and it won't impact the community
system-wide if they happen to be wet.
We think it's prudent for those types of businesses to plan
for 3.9 feet of sea level rise
and be ready for those two to four times a year.
High tide scenarios, the highest astronomical tides,
if they have to close their doors in sandbag in a 50
to 60 years time in order to make sure that
that retail store can uh, be operational the next day.
We don't see that as a breakdown of the community.
Um, and we would like those businesses to prepare
for the 3.9 plus the highest astronomical tide
as uses get more sensitive.
This is the residential occupancies, that's category two.
Uh, this ordinance is proposing that they prepare
for 3.9 feet of sea level rise,
which is a higher probability.
We will very likely see that within the lifespan
of a residence been built today.
Um, and storms can be really impactful
for those, uh, occupancies.
It doesn't mean the business is just shut down for a day.
It means that someone has to find a new home for a couple
of days and it may be more than a couple
of days in the year if we factor in things like high tide
combined with lower, um, intensity storms,
but more frequent storms.
So because of that displacement factor,
because people may need to be somewhere else, um,
we really think they need to prepare for more
and elevate those structures a little bit more.
The difference between those two is
that a retail store could be built at 11.6 NAD
88 relatively.
The house that's built next to it would have to prepare
and build 2.4 feet higher, two and a half feet higher.
Um, so that's three extra steps on a walk up.
Uh, and then city halls, hospitals, high density residential
or more than 11 units, um, will need to prepare
for 8.8 feet of sea level rise.
And the 1% storms
and 19 feet NAVD 88,
that's five feet on top of a single family home.
What it would have to prepare for
that scenario would look like.
Um, you know, ground floor commercial uses,
ground floor garage uses
and the residents start on the second floor
and they're high and dry.
Um, their garage might get wet. Not a big deal.
Um, because the, the residents can continue
to occupy the building continues to operate.
Sorry, all its HVAC
and electrical systems continue to operate.
This is a site by site evaluation that we have to do.
It's what we do for all development. Nothing different here.
The ground elevation is going to influence things.
So I wanna have a couple of slides just
to help visualize this for you.
People are gonna interpret this information differently.
So I have just three ways of showing you what that is.
I'll go through them quickly. For frame of reference.
Our average Willard Beach residential lot sits at where
that blue arrow shows on the screen.
Um, that's just ground level. Okay?
So homes, if you're meeting building code today are
typically about six inches to a foot of foundation reveal.
So they're already above that by some just to comply
with normal building code practices.
Many homes in Willard, for instance, have, uh,
slightly higher, you know, four
to five steps up to your front door.
So it's common to be higher than that.
But just ground elevation for Willard Beach lots is
where that blue arrow is.
In order for a new house
to be built at a typical ground lot in Willard,
it would just need to be for the, the floor
that you live on, sleep on, have your kitchen on would've
to be four feet above grade, five steps, okay?
Uh, in ferry, in ferry village,
it's the elevations average is higher.
So three feet above
what you see in a typical grade out there.
Very doable. Um, Hannaford the entrance to Hannaford,
this is one we often think about
because those January 20, 24 storms brought water into the
parking lot of Hannaford Hannaford's front entrance on the
front side is actually meeting
and exceeding where we would want new construction.
Uh, for retail commercial occupancies
that would DFE one elevation.
So Hannaford would be fine as is,
but if Hanna were want Hannaford wanted
to do an addition on its backside
where the ground drops off, it would have
to meet the elevation of its front door
and just carry that horizontally across.
So it'll be up from,
if you were looking at it from the ground at the backside,
um, its utility systems would have
to be at that elevation as well.
Very doable City hall, if we were to rebuild,
tear this down, rebuild under this cross,
we would start city operations city, uh,
working floor areas four
and a half feet off of the sidewalk
outside for frame of reference.
This is another way to visualize it.
Depending on how high the elevation is on the ground below
the use may or may not need
to actually do anything different.
So here's a scenario. Imagine this is, uh,
very low lying area.
Something like Willard Beach, very close to the beach.
Only exempt uses would not have to do anything
but the ground level underneath.
Um, all of the types of uses, low sensitivity,
moderate sensitivity, and high sensitivity is below
where we would want them to design to.
So even a retail store in Willard, if we were to allow it,
um, would need to do something, um,
beyond the normal six inch
foundation reveal that they would do.
As we move away from the water elevation rises
and maybe retail stores don't have to do anything
because the ground's doing all the work,
the ground is already up, right?
But moderate and higher sensitivity
uses will have to do something.
Um, high sensitivity uses within the cross will always have
to elevate above the ground plane
because once we are outside of the cross, that's
where the ground elevation is high enough that it's above
that 19 feet and of 80, 88
and even high sensitivity uses won't have
to do anything very quickly.
Another way to look at it is this is a map showing depths
of in elevations, the coloring is just across boundary.
If you were proposing a retail store, um,
and you wanted to propose it anywhere in this pink,
darker pink band, those are all areas
where the elevation is already good.
You're already well above the
DFE that we want you to propose.
You're thinking about a retail store on Broadway.
The cross means nothing to you.
If you think about a, a retail store in the orange area,
that's where the elevation starts to drop.
But it's still above the elevation
where 3.9 feet plus highest astronomical tide is irrelevant.
The retail store can just do whatever it wants.
Cross does not matter for that store.
If you're proposing a an 11
or more unit apartment building on Broadway for instance,
that's a high sensitivity, use
the 8.8 feet plus sea level rise plus the 1% storm
is able to reach potentially up to Broadway.
We would want that, uh, 12 unit apartment building
to elevate to that 19 feet and a VD 88.
It might mean it only needs to raise three inches, you know,
if it was right on the boundary line.
Um, but this just helps visualize it that it depends
what you're proposing and what the ground elevation is
and whether you actually need to elevate in order
to stay dry from the water that we project to be there.
Um, so this is just a schematic showing
how different uses in those use categories would just need
to start their use at a higher elevation.
Some pictures to show what
kind of things we're talking about.
Uh, low sensitivities, those commercial type uses.
Moderate sensitivities, smaller scale residential.
High sensitivity is the high density
residential I mentioned earlier.
We have set of prohibited uses
that we think would just be inappropriate
within the cross period.
Uh, and that category
of uses is in attachment one for you all.
As a quick summary, these are things
that involve environmental hazards
or contaminants like gas distribution, petroleum storage,
waste transfer stations.
We think those things just shouldn't be in the cross.
Frankly, I don't know that anyone's proposing those things
anywhere in the cross, but we wanna state those
should not be allowed there.
Uh, I keep mentioning that these building types
that would comply with the cross are familiar.
I wanna show you some visuals.
We did surveys through the community. We did walkabouts.
We brought out the neighbors,
we brought out property owners.
We discussed what they might need to do.
So here's an example on the left.
A building that's at grade.
The first floor of elevation is at grade.
Um, that's how it was built back then another example here,
this was an older building,
but this one is built with four steps up to its main entry.
And that's just because the
topography dropped off in that way.
Here's a very recent new build.
Uh, it's already built four feet above grade
that would be fully compliant with DFE two in virtually all
of the cross area if it was being proposed.
So familiar building forms, people are already doing it
and they're making that decision not because of the cross.
This is a, uh, digital survey that we did using, uh,
street view imagery, um,
and counting things like the steps up to the ground floors
of residential buildings in Willard and Ferry Village.
These are biggest residential areas.
These are approximations,
but we're pretty confident it's within inches of accuracy.
What we're trying to show here, what we tried
to analyze here is how many buildings built today
that may have been built, you know, 60, 70, 80 years ago.
How many of them are actually compliant with
what we would want them to do?
And are we so far off?
Is it really asking this entire community
to be dramatically different?
Uh, under the cross? Uh, the colors
that you might wanna e or focus on here are the darker ones.
Pink, um, and black are properties
where we find they would be compliant.
Residential properties that would be compliant
with the elevation that we're asking them to get to.
They're already built to
where we would want them to be built to.
Um, I don't want to go property by property here,
but when we, and in your memo,
I summarize this in the statistic, it's uh, roughly half
of the properties in Willard, it's more than half
of the properties are already compliant.
So, um, these wouldn't be sort of eyesore.
They were starting to comply with the cross.
Here's some examples of higher density residential buildings
that would be compliant through the cross,
through the creative use of the ground floors.
So we've got one on the left with a garage
that would be an exempt activity on the ground floor.
Another one on the right where it has
commercial on the ground floor.
The commercial has to prepare for less, uh,
flooding elevation, but that allows those residential units
above to be more than, uh,
exceeding the 19 feet NAD 88 that they would've to comply
with This, uh,
slide emphasizes those types
of projects that we had to figure out.
This probably is
where we spent the most time debating
what's the right thing to do.
Uh, where we generally landed was
to split these down the middle in terms of where we wanted
to be more strict versus less strict
new construction and additions.
It's very clear to us that the architecture
and engineering is there
and is familiar to, uh, comply with the cross.
And so we would expect that most of those projects, except
for the very smallest ones, would have
to meet the cross expectation.
It gets more difficult when we're talking
about existing buildings.
These are structures we're familiar
with important buildings in the community.
We want to keep them active. We don't want to cause blight.
Uh, we want to keep people's investments going.
And we also want to give people an ability to ratchet up
and prepare for flooding over time
and sort of be as flexible as we can
with existing structures.
'cause people are in there and people's
livelihoods are tied to those.
So changes of use and substantial improvements.
We tried to give a little more flexibility for those types
of projects under new construction or additions.
Those components of the building,
either the whole new construction building
or just the addition to an existing building,
if it was a high sensitivity use that was proposed,
the whole thing would have to comply
with the elevation that we prescribed here.
It's that 19 feet NAVD 88 for moderate sensitivity.
We exempted this is that residential grouping
of less than 10 units.
We said that it only kicks in at 1200 square feet
and that lines up with the maximum size for 80 use.
That's really what drove that number.
Uh, we wanted to exempt those out
because they're sort of infill projects, small scale, um,
and want to create a streamlined path for them.
And then under low sensitivity uses,
if you were proposing a new commercial build
or an addition to a commercial
and it was over 5,000 square feet, um,
then you would have to comply.
If you're smaller, you wouldn't.
So here's a couple of examples.
Cafe Louie on the commercial side is
less than 5,000 square feet.
That's 1,011 hundred square feet.
The image on the left is a residence.
It has 864 square feet.
You could build that, um,
and not necessarily have to comply with the cross.
Here's some examples that would be above those thresholds.
So very large single family home,
3,300 square feet in this left image.
In the middle image, a multi-family,
uh, construction project.
And our Dunking Donuts here is over, uh, 5,000 square feet.
So that would have to comply and meet the elevations.
All right, so a new construction and additions generally,
unless it's very small scale, would have to comply.
Changes of use when we have an existing retail store,
existing restaurant and it wants to change
to another commercial activity, an office wants
to occupy those spaces and then it wants to revert back.
This happens on a pretty frequent basis.
You all know downtown and some of our storefronts that,
you know, two, three years, it seems like some
of them keep changing over.
We didn't want to create a scenario
where the crawls would force one of those businesses to, uh,
occupy that storefront,
prevent a vacant storefront in our downtown.
And the reason why it's not, uh, reason why it's vacant is
because they didn't wanna pay
to elevate the entire building.
So in that category of commercial uses
where it's low sensitivity to flooding, they can convert,
do changes of use and invest in those properties
and keep, keep investing in those properties without having
to elevate the whole structure.
Under moderate sensitivity, when they're proposing up
to 10 residential units, the first 5,000 square feet
of conversion would be exempt
and the entire substantial improvement category, uh,
we've just decided to recommend to you all
that we do not include that in this version of cross.
This would be an example where it's an existing building
and someone wants to invest in upgrading its
insulation for energy efficiency.
Updating its HVAC equipment,
maybe it doesn't have air conditioning
and it's a senior, uh, residence, um,
doing structural improvements, improving facades
because they haven't been touched in 60 years
and people are occupying those buildings.
We want people to be able to do those things without fear
that they'll have to lift the
entire building up at the same time.
And so for now, we've exempted that type of activity.
We'll continue to monitor that
and maybe ratchet that up when it makes sense
and we see some more examples and test it out.
Um, here's a couple
of examples of what that might look like.
The left image is a conversation I've had with,
uh, second rodeo coffee.
It's an interesting building residence
above the coffee shop down below.
And, uh, offices and other commercial uses on
that ground floor adjacent to the, um, cafe they had,
I'm not sure if they're still interested in this,
but at some point they had asked could we put residents down
there, um, add more residential units on those ground floor.
And if it's one thing that we were reflecting on, like
what would the cross do for them?
And with that 5,000 square foot exemption,
they absolutely could do that.
It's an existing building.
They could put residents in there.
Someone could occupy those apartments for 20, 30 years
and the flood waters might not, uh,
actually impact them at that point.
When it does, they can move into some more benign use.
But those apartments can be valuable homes for people
for 20, 30 years.
That's not insignificant.
So we wanted to provide some exemption
for small scale internal conversions.
Uh, so those, um, buildings could be occupied.
Uh, the middle example would be that ground floor
of, of residential use.
Um, maybe they want to take this building
and do some, some substantial improvements.
It wouldn't force them to lift
that entire building up at that time.
Uh, some of our bigger commercial buildings, again,
could be rehabbed, taken care of, not led to blight.
Um, substantial improvements wouldn't be forced
to comply with cause.
Okay, the standard approach is
to elevate the secondary approach.
If it's warranted and the applicant chooses to do this, um,
it's an option to them to do an alternative compliance
option that provides equal flood protection.
And the ethic here is that we're trying to be flexible.
We wanna work together and build this
cross over time together.
Let's pretend you had a high sensitivity
use that you were proposing.
We would expect that you elevate to DFE three
19 feet NAVD 80 D eight.
You take that option and you
run with it and it works for you.
Great. Um,
but if you had a scenario where getting to
that elevation might not work
and you can explain why that scenario doesn't work
and you can show us that there's an alternative compliance
method, we're thinking what would be reasonable is that all,
all development always prepares for 3.9 feet.
So always prepares for the DFE slight one step below
and then has flexibility on how it meets the remainder.
So an example of what
that might look like is an apartment building which has
commercial on the ground floor.
That commercial, uh, might only need to be a DFE one.
So actually the commercial is all good.
It complies, it's elevated to where it needs to be.
This is fully compliant,
but the utility systems want to be on ground level
so they can be easily serviced.
They're serving the commercial uses
and they want to be connected to those commercial uses
and they've got this chamber here,
but it also serves, whoops,
it also serves the residential above.
So the standard cross would say
that those utility systems have to be up
where the yellow portion of that building is.
But maybe this applicant can come forward
and say, well that utility closet,
I'm gonna waterproof completely.
What's wrong with that? It would still be functional,
it would still be fully operational.
It would still be serviceable
and it would be meeting both the needs of, of the building.
That's a scenario or a
conversation that we would like to have.
And it would be on the applicant to demonstrate
that this is a reasonable, responsible
and long-term approach that would allow this building
to continue operating.
Another example here, um,
this is an accessibility challenge.
Um, they wanted to have a building where uh,
they can demonstrate that they want
to have access on the ground floor to come in.
Access and lobby space, for instance, is exempted
and they can demonstrate that this bottom skirt
of the building underneath the windows
is waterproofed and protected.
Um, if they propose a new material membrane that isn't part
of standard construction, but they want to utilize it here,
would we want to preclude that?
I think we'd want to have the conversation,
or at least the draft ordinance is expecting to have
that conversation and let the applicant prove their case
that it's alternative equivalent
to blood protection by elevation.
Uh, the protocol that we would use for that is
that the applicant would need to choose that it wants
to use this creative path.
It always has that off the shelf option of elevating,
but they would wanna move this path forward
and it's up to them to say, this is meaningful to me,
here's why and here's a good solution.
The body that would vet
that would be our planning board in a public hearing,
they would hear the request.
And at a minimum right now we're thinking that the way
that they would scrutinize that is familiar to
how we scrutinize site plan standards.
Um, and the key metrics that they would be looking
for is what's the intended lifespan of the building
and is your solution gonna work within that?
What is the potential impact on public health, uh,
welfare and safety?
And is there any risk
of displacement if this solution fails?
Is if that thing is down,
are people gonna have to leave their homes?
That's probably risk.
We, we wouldn't allow that alternative.
You simply have to elevate, for instance,
is the alternative effective relative to the flood risks
that we are projecting for.
And those will evolve over time as we gain more information.
And is the impact to the flood profile
of the surrounding areas, um, minimal or negligible?
So for instance, if you're just putting up a wall
and deflecting the water and it's gonna cause damage
to your neighbors, that's really not something
that's an acceptable alternative For new
construction and additions.
Um, we would allow this alternative compliance option with
that minimum preparing three for 3.9 feet,
and then using those alternative compliance measures
to get you up to the level that you're supposed to be at.
So if you're a moderate sensitivity use, you would prepare
for highest astronomical tide
and then maybe do tactical flood proofing just
to prepare for storm conditions.
If you're a high sensitivity use, you would elevate
to 3.9 plus, um, highest astronomical, excuse me, storm,
and then use flood proofing to get to 8.8 feet plus storm.
When we're talking about existing buildings, we would want
to offer a little bit more flexibility, again,
to keep those buildings active and used in the interim, uh,
and allow alternative compliance options.
And I can share images
and things on what that might look like.
They've been deployed throughout the world.
They're effective, they're used in emergency scenarios.
We can look at some of that if, if you want.
We think it's an important category. We wanna be open to it.
So this is the last slide on flooding,
and I think this one's really important.
There's a lot of material in here at the end of the day,
this is a simple process that we do all day long
in the planning and development office
when a development is proposed.
I'm sharing with you the totality of this ordinance,
but any individual project only cares
about its particular scenario.
So it needs to ask four questions to flow
through this thing is my project.
In the cross, we have a simple map.
You can search it up just like our zoning map.
We're talking about elevations.
Those are familiar metrics that all developers, surveyors
and, uh, architects know.
What is my project's flood
sensitivity, what do I wanna propose?
Am I doing a parking lot or am I doing a hospital?
What elevation do I need to prepare for?
Where am I exempt entirely based on
the sensitivity of my use?
Do I need to go to 11.6 14
or 19 feet for my floors?
Those are, again, elevation metrics, easy to track.
And then finally, is it meaningful to me as the applicant?
Do I want to propose an alternative option?
I don't have to, but if it's meaningful, I have the option.
Pause for a second there. Um, on high heat, it's two slides.
And quick, We have some principles
that guide the ordinance standards for high heat.
Really this comes down
to two new things in our zoning ordinance.
The first deals with, well, they both deal with trying
to reduce the amount of surface cover
that absorbs heat rather than reflects heat.
Um, and we're gonna be doing that on ground surfaces,
mainly paving and rooftops.
Okay, on the ground surfaces, the solution is how much of
that ground surface that absorbs heat.
We know we have to have those surfaces. That's asphalt.
We cannot avoid pavement.
Um, when we have that pavement, the ordinance would require
that a percentage of that pavement is covered
by some form of shade.
Canopy trees typically,
but maybe someone wants
to propose solar panels or whatever that's up to them.
As long as that heat absorbing material on the ground
is covered so that it doesn't absorb that heat anymore,
then we'll satisfy the high heat, um, adaptation needs.
This would kick in for parking lots with 20 or more spaces,
or if you propose hardscape of 3000 square feet
in those scenarios, you have
to cover a percentage of that hardscape.
That heat absorbs heat with shading.
Typically we'd prefer trees. You can propose alternatives.
The second piece is for building rooftops.
We want higher reflectivity rooftops,
that means a higher solar reflectivity index.
We would introduce a new, um, SRI standard for roofs.
Flat roofs have many, many more options for
what materials you'll use
and ready options that are, uh, cost comparable today,
uh, that have a high reflectivity.
So with flat roofs, we can expect and set a high standard
and it's readily achievable.
Sloped roofs are a challenge.
Um, the products are just not in the market
to meet the same level of reflectivity as a flat roof.
And so we're gonna be proposing a lower standard
for sloped roofs In both scenarios.
Like with the, uh, ground cover that absorbs heat,
it would only kick in at 20 parking spaces
or 3000 square feet.
The rooftop reflexive, uh,
compliance would kick in at 2000 square foot roofs
or residential uses with 11 plus units.
Those numbers are based on what kind of size
of project is going to typically lead
to a flat roof construction.
So we're trying to track those numbers.
Um, but at the end of the day,
we're gonna be just instituting some basic standards on
making sure that we're limiting how much
of the sun's heat is absorbed and kept through shading
and through reflection.
And so that brings us to the discussion
and insights for council.
The high heat piece, we really
don't have any targeted questions for that.
Welcome, any input you have on that. Questions you may have.
Happy to answer those. Uh, all of these questions are on,
uh, the flooding scenarios.
So the first three are really the critical ones.
The fourth is just can we proceed?
So number one, those scenarios, we talked about 3.9 feet,
which is a realistic flood
scenario that we need to prepare for.
And then either with high tide
because of how frequently it's gonna occur or with 1% storms
because of how much that might cause displacement
for residential units and then 8.8 feet plus 1% storm
for the really, really critical long-term uses
that cannot attack, adapt later at reasonable cost.
Are those the three scenarios
that are the right ones to prepare for?
We think we've struck the balance, but we need your input.
Second is that we have uses that rightfully
fit within each one of those three buckets.
Do you agree that there's a low, moderate,
high gradient to uses?
Some uses can get wet, some uses if they're involved,
displacement just need to prepare for a little bit less.
And then there's those few uses that are really critical.
And then finally, we've proposed
that alternative compliance option.
We want to give people flexibility.
We wanna learn as we implement this ordinance
and evolve it over time.
Are you supportive of that alternative compliance option?
And then if it's sort of yes to all three of those,
can we proceed to planning board,
which would be the next step?
Rough timeline for that is probably three months or so.
We of course need the comp plan to be adopted.
It sets the policy framework for all of this.
So we would look for comp plan adoption
and then, um, work through this with our consultant team.
I will apologize on our consultant
team's behalf because of the storm.
They intended to be here tonight, but they're not.
Um, so we'll be taking questions
and think we're prepared to answer them,
but if there's anything that we need to defer to them on,
we'll report back.
Okay. Well that was actually absolutely fascinating.
Yes, thank you. Um, just a quick little housekeeping.
I think one of our counselors may have an
wee hours obligation.
No, we're good. Okay. Um, alright.
So do we have council questions for either Julie or Milan?
That's really clear. Pardon me? Are you clear?
And that was kind of amazing.
Um, there may it, it,
I think maybe when we get into our discussion,
there could be some questions that come up,
but it doesn't look like right now we have any
immediate questions. Well, counselor
Scott. Sorry. I do.
No, don't ever apologize.
Um, I think let's start here and then I can go back.
I had one early on.
Um, can you just clarify,
and maybe this is within the chart, the difference
between the 3.9 and highest tide and the 3.9
and 1% storm.
I Think it's 2.4, 2.4 feet.
I think it's in that little bar graph. Yeah.
So DFE one is 11.6 NA VD 88.
Uh, let's say ground level was there
and you proposed the residential use,
that would mean you have to meet DFE two, you would would've
to be, uh, 3.6, excuse me, 3.4
Feet higher. Okay.
So there's roughly say two
and a half feet between the 3.9 plus high tide
and 3.9 plus 1% storm.
Uh, there's exactly 3.4 feet between them.
Okay. And
and the distinction as to how
that applies is in the uses that would need to comply
with the DFE 1 23, right?
Yeah. If you had a lot
and it happened to be at 11.6 NAD 88, you could put
a retail store and walk from the grass directly into
the storefront.
If you wanted to put a residence there, two units,
four units up to 10 units, uh,
you would've to do three steps,
Four steps. Okay. And
the consideration is that the
1% storm, I mean, I guess I'm just trying
to think about the, the three levels and whether
or not the, the I would think so the,
the 3.9 plus high tide is sort
of like, of course that's gonna happen.
The 3.9 plus 1% is like,
we know it's gonna happen, but it's not that frequent.
Like that's the sort of distinction between the level
or the steps at which you build that risk and
therefore set the categories of low medium
Yes. The frequency,
but then also even if it happens once
the things that are in the moderate category means
someone's sleeping somewhere else tonight.
Yeah. Right. Okay. And so,
and that's the order of magnitude impact is different. Yep.
No, that's helpful. Okay.
And also, Julie mentioned this,
and I'm wanna emphasize it, is that we're modeling 1% storm
on an average tide condition.
But like what happened in January,
we didn't have all these sea level rise situation as,
as we're projecting for 3.9 and 8.8,
but it was 1% on top of a very high tide.
And so, or actually sorry, it was, uh,
slightly less than a 1% storm, so it occurs more frequently,
but it happened to be tagged with Tide.
And so it had the effect of something
that is a much rarer storm event on a normal tide.
So we're modeling for 1%
and we expect, I think the number was 26%, uh,
probability on a 30 year mortgage.
But you might have a 50 year storm,
and if it hits multiple times on highest astronomical times,
tides every other year, you
could experience it more frequently.
Yeah. Okay. And then you're talking displacement.
Yeah, no, and I just wanted to sort
of understand the risk kind of steps.
Um, I think that there was a slide very early on.
Oh, can I ask another one? Or you want to go? No,
Go ahead. There
was just a slide earlier on that showed the 3.9
and the 8.8,
and I just wanted, I, I think I actually found in the,
The mapping, The mapping that
that is all within the cross,
but then within the cross there's the various elevations
of the, um, of the dfe
and that relates to the levels of the 3.9 plus one, 3.9,
high tide 8.8.
Okay. I mean, I know there's a million maps, so I just need
to kind of spend more time with them. But
The cross will be one map
and then a bunch of elevation metrics.
Okay. Okay. So every, this is the map of 8.8 plus 1% storm.
Everyone developing in here will have
to have a conversation about flooding.
And if that conversation is, Hey,
I wanna do a parking lot here, we can tell them Go ahead.
Yeah. If the conversation is, I wanna do a hospital,
then you need to keep an eye on 19 feet elevation.
Yeah. And if your ground levels at 18 feet,
it means you need to do one foot of elevation.
Your ground level is you're trying
to do a hospital on front street,
you're gonna need to do a lot more than that.
Yep. Okay. Thank you.
Um, I had a quick question.
Um, there is a slide that had a list of things.
You said these are things that are not allowed in the cross.
So do you mean they're not newly allowed?
Because it includes a list of things
that are definitely in the cross.
So the, um, base zoning district will define what's
allowed in that district.
Um, and then the cross is overlaid on top of that.
So when we do this comp plan cleanup,
I think there'll be perfect synchrony with this stuff.
But for instance, today we have commercial zones, uh, right.
River place condos is a commercial zone.
The Coast Guard is a commercial zone.
Commercial zone provides all kinds
of gas stations could be there.
And that's just legacy zoning.
We know we need to clean it up.
We'll do that in the comp plan.
But if this cross was adopted today under current zoning,
someone could come in
and say, I wanna do a gas station right next
to River Place condos.
It's in the commercial zone.
If the cross was in effect
and say, yeah, the commercial zone allows it,
but the cross prevents that use.
Uh, we already have this kind of thing
with the Shoreland zone.
It has what's called a resource protection district
in the Shoreland zone.
And what that district says is yours zone allows you
to do whatever it allows you to do.
But in the RPD, the Resource Protection District,
the only thing you can build is docks, parks, open spaces,
and things that are water dependent.
'cause it's, that's just the nature of
that resource conservation zone.
Um, so that's how this prohibition would work.
It would preclude any of these, uh,
activities within that flood area.
Okay. All right.
If there are no more council questions,
public comment is open on what Milan has just presented.
Come remember
how enthusiastic you were a couple of hours ago.
John Pany Beach Street. It's late. Everybody's tired.
I'll be brief. Uh, thank
You, John. You're
welcome. Um, so, uh, there was a citizen
resident committee that was asked to, uh, collaborate
with the, uh, sustainability office
and the planning office to take a deep dive, to use
Milan's favorite term, to take a deep dive, uh, into all
of these, um, ideas and regulations and suggestions
and numbers and predictions.
And, uh, we did that.
And, uh, we went to all those buildings you saw on the,
the pictures and everything was explained to us.
We were asked for our feedback.
Uh, and, uh, we, we really were immersed
for several days in, in these issues.
Um, I think when people do, when, when people take on a,
a really hard job, a really challenging problem,
and they do a really good job and,
and they just, uh, hit, hit a home run, uh, you should say.
So, uh, I, I think these guys did a great job.
I think what they brought forward to you is,
is not a first draft.
I I think it's, uh, very serious work
to solve a very serious problem.
And, uh, I'm very impressed with, with what they've done.
And I, I think they've done a great job. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Did anyone else
want to make any comments?
Hello, my name is Georgia DeVere.
I live on Victory Avenue on meeting House Hill.
Um, I too went on the walk shops
and participated in the entire
process, uh, walking through Ferry Village, uh, walking, uh,
around Mill Creek, um, with all the engineers
and getting the explanation.
Um, I also wanna say though, that I,
I feel that the Comprehensive Planning Commission could have
ordered this flood overlay map,
um, a few years ago.
It would've been better timed in terms of integrating it
with the comprehensive, uh, plan, um, regarding the most,
uh, controversial and problematic area of South Portland.
Not included in the climate overlay, um,
Raising buildings.
Uh, the only solution really
that I saw offered in the walk shops in, in here tonight,
however, high, um, does not address traffic
evacuation, storm surges infrastructure,
and the ever present risk of toxin mobility in the soil
and water for River Casco Bay
and the groundwater petroleum tank fumes, leaks
or explosions in the shipyard district.
The timeline of the new comprehensive plan order
of operations, if you will,
have been disordered public inputs were effectively cut off
over two years ago when a community engagement report was
produced and became part of the 2040 comp plan
gathering Georgia.
Hmm. Can you orient your comments to what we saw today?
I actually am, it's all about flooding
and where to flood and what to do about it. All right.
All right. Well, we have, just be careful. Thank you.
I don't know what, I don't know what to do.
I don't know how to I'm, I'm doing it. All right.
Let me just continue.
Yeah, just keep going. I only have three minutes.
Just keep going. Thank you.
Gathering climate, financial
and legal information should have come
before considering luxury condos,
a hotel in a fractional amount of housing for the not
so rich, affordable waterfront housing, residential
and lodging language.
A unique designation, a high growth designation,
or as a state will view it.
Growth in this, sorry.
Um, in the shipyard
and eastern waterfront area
of the 2040 plan stands a direct opposition
to community input.
If you pass this 2040 comp plan with its six, instead
of the state's recognized three zones,
We're not really talking about the comp plan right now,
But we are, this is part of the comp plan.
It's, it's, um,
It's separate.
Alright. I, I, I,
I can realize you've been here all evening,
you've been hanging in and you,
and have some points to make, but
I'll make one. Okay. Because
obviously, thanks.
You want me to stop talking? Um,
I, I, I'm asking you,
but I kind of need to follow the rules.
Go ahead, please.
I will just say that Boston not too far from us had two
100 year storms two years ago.
And the Boston Seaport
is a nightmare, and I don't want
to invite that here in South Portland.
I don't want inundation district documentary made
about South Portland.
And I'm really sorry you didn't let me read what I,
what I, what I brought.
Well get here. I have an idea.
Can you send it to council since it's written down?
Can you send it to us as email? All, yeah. I think
I would like to say out loud,
I'm sorry. I think that's
the best solution
that we can come up with at the moment.
Thank you. Is there anyone else who'd like to talk about
what Milan presented?
Thank you.
Good evening. My name's Dave Burkey, um,
high Street in South Portland.
Um, Milan and Julie. Excellent presentation.
Well thought out. Um, really, really impressive.
And the graphics were excellent.
So, um, this is not an easy subject,
so congratulations on that.
The one thing that I would add
that was not said in this presentation is, the best thing
to do in a flood zone is not to build in the first place.
That's the smart thing.
That's the economically correct thing to do.
So in places where there are already dwellings already
businesses, yes, we have to adjust,
but if we have green space that we don't need
to put development on.
The smart thing to do is not to do it at all. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Anyone else want
to talk about the coastal resilience overlay zone?
Yeah. Um, thank you. Planning, uh, excellent job.
Really appreciate all the work that you put in.
Um, um, on a few of the details. Say, say who, oh, sorry.
PJ Craig in resident of South Portland on a few
of the details that, um, I think are interesting
to talk about is like, do you want things like hospitals
inside of the 8.8?
You might not want to do that
because you're then driving a lot of people that might need
to go there during a situation
that the roads are actually flooded.
So I think that maybe looking at some
of the like critical uses like inside
of 8.8 would be helpful
to just make sure you tease out the ones that
could cause some problems down the road.
And also you wanna be really,
I think you should be careful about buildings that,
that are truly built to last a hundred years
or more that I think some of them, we, we don't,
we don't have them going to 8.8 feet.
So I think that's a, a thought.
I know that under what 11 units, they, they don't need
to be built for that.
I just, I think people really wanna know,
like they're gonna invest $500,000 in building a house.
They may really wanna know, Hey, if you wanna pass this on
to the next generation, you might wanna build to 8.8.
Um, I think that's an important part.
Also, it's, it's a point well taken that, um, we have to pay
for all the roads that lead to these places.
Um, we have to pay for all the infrastructure.
And I know there's some discussion
around about climate resilience funds that will
maybe pick up the costs that, uh,
private developers put money into.
But I would suspect over the coming decades
that those funds will likely be depleted, um,
probably more quickly than we want
or need them to be depleted.
So I think that's a element
that needs to be integrated here.
I think the response to some of the people
who went on the climate walk were like, yeah,
we can build all these buildings really high and well
and suited for flood, but we're standing on a street
and a sidewalk right now that will be flooded
and there's infrastructure beneath our feet that will need
to be upgraded, and who's gonna pay for it?
And then who's gonna pay for the repairs
and who's gonna pay for the maintenance?
And we actually don't really,
we don't have an engineering report
for the sewage treatment plant
that's gonna be in deep trouble, um, with, with the 8.8
and we're attaching a whole lot,
possibly attaching a whole lot more units
to a sewage treatment plant
that we don't have a, a real plan for.
Um, this just, it, it feels like, like the bigger picture
of like the policy direction,
it hasn't really been teased out.
The comp plan had so many things to deal with.
Uh, we, we weren't able
to really dig into sea level rise on the level
that I think people's concern was.
Also the tank firms, although they're not part
of the climate resilience plant, uh, I mean the,
the cross overlay, um,
they're very significant problem for the city.
10 seconds. Um, yeah, I don't know where they can,
if they can fit in the overlay somehow,
but I do think they need to be dealt with.
And that is totally legitimate mobilization of those, uh,
those, uh, buried, uh,
brown fields is very significant
problem for sea level rise. Thanks.
Thank you. Anyone else like to make a comment?
Alright. All right. Oh, yes. One more person.
I just wanna thank a couple of our speakers, um, of both.
Can you say your name? Oh,
Claire Holman and I live in Ferry Village.
Um, and, uh, um, I, I agree that, that we, you know,
I think it's, it seems like everything's all about these
bigger, bigger buildings
and I think we, I think that we really should
not be building in flood zones.
Um, we should, we should endeavor to keep, if there's spaces
that aren't built on, especially if they're near the water,
we should really, those we
are not gonna get more of that ever.
We, and it, you know,
and it should be available to be flooded when it needs
to without having buildings and things to worry about.
Everything that PJ mentioned about infrastructure
that's gonna have to be protected.
Those are really big concerns.
I also wanna talk about the heat question.
Um, I feel like, um, there's
absolutely not enough emphasis on
shade in the form of trees.
Uh, we have new, new, like if you go over on, um, uh,
in red bank, that new, the new buildings, which, you know,
you won't call 'em beauty wi beauty pageant winners,
but you know, where the, the things
that are planted are the equivalent.
The once snowplow hit, they're dead.
Once snowplow hit, they're dead.
They're these little, you know what they are, right? Yeah.
Once snowplow hit, they're gone. There was not trees.
New England's supposed to be tree shade, tree lined,
shade, tree lined streets.
A lot of 'em that ended with, with the elm disease.
But we have, like, when you plant a shade tree, it's,
it's wildlife.
It's, it's, it is generations of benefit and it's cheap.
And yes, there's a little bit of maintenance,
but you know, an arborist can help, you know, like,
which trees are gonna be less maintenance,
but we really shouldn't everything, every place, every,
like you can't say it's too much of an expense
to plant shade trees.
We, it absolutely.
And it shouldn't be just for, it should be
for all size buildings, for every kind
of parking lot, all those things.
Um, you know, they also help, you know,
they help hold things together.
There's so many benefits
and I'm just distressed that we're,
we're here we are in this day
and age, we're building these new buildings
and, you know, just junk for, for, for landscaping.
It's, it's a, it's sad. It's not like our main street.
Look what we put there. That's our main street. Anyway.
It should be a lot better than that. We can do better.
Thank you. Thank you. I promise
I'll be 30 seconds.
Really? That should be
Interesting. Hi, my name is
David Field and I live at 64 Summit Street.
I just wanna, uh, just,
just bring one point is when we talk about a 1% chance
of a hundred year storm, okay.
I think, uh, when you mentioned as far as going back, what
that really is is a 26% chance over a
30 year period.
So if you've got, let's say over a hundred years,
that becomes multiple times.
And so a 26% chance, you know, even it could
occur much more often.
So I think that's, that's to, that's to be aware of.
The second thing is, yes, you can build a hospital
and protect it to the 8.8 feet,
but I'll reiterate is what's gonna happen to all the roads,
the parking lots,
and other things that are gonna be flooded.
The hospital may be sitting high up in the air,
but you can't get to it.
So thank you very much.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Um, Julie, you wanted to add something real quick? Thanks.
I do. Thanks. Um, I, I loved hearing all of this comment.
I just wanted to, um, oh, I just wanted
to bring up the point, a clarifying point that this causes
for a new development.
Um, it is one piece of building our resilience puzzle.
We're also taking on another project right now
that hopefully will be done in a year and a half
or two years, um, that looks at city infrastructure.
Um, and it's a risk-based asset management tool.
So that's another piece for the infrastructure piece.
So this isn't supposed to be something
that solves all of our problems.
It's for particularly for new development. Thank you.
Thank you. That's helpful. Anyone else?
Anyone? El Oh, we have one more. Well, another
Charlie Teamy, uh, Lombard Street.
I just, uh, was recently in Chicago
and enjoyed the beautiful park along the lake, which, uh,
was under constant threat throughout the,
uh, modern era.
And Montgomery Ward, I guess, was the guy that, uh, stood up
and, um, fought all development in that area.
It makes a beautiful place for, um, people.
It's helped a lot of, uh, people want to live in that city.
And that's all I want to say.
Thank you. Okay.
No more public comment. Alright.
Public comment on this topic is closed.
I think our council's been asked to answer a few questions
to give guidance to staff, so let us do that.
Um, how about if we just go 1, 2, 3, 4
down the lane here.
Can you start, start Counselor Scott, please?
Uh, do you see what I,
you see what I'm talking about, right?
Sure. Yes. I, I think so. Um,
Flood scenarios that were selected, resolved,
I think it reasonable.
Yes. I think that it all seems reasonable.
Um, and thank you so much for all of the work around this.
Very, very thoughtful and thorough.
Um, I, I,
I think I agree generally with sort of everything
that was presented.
Um, and I, I do wanna specifically agree on the flexibility
that, that having sort of an elevation based compliance
and then an alternative I think is important.
And I think with the amount of, um, technology
and engineering and work that is, um, whether it's existing
or new gonna need to happen in the next 75 years to mitigate
this risk, is we, we don't know what that is yet.
And we don't know what the new technology
or engineering might be.
So I do think that having that
flexibility is incredibly important.
And I, you know, go forth
and conquer on that and the heat island.
Let's get more trees. Thank you. Thank you.
I wanna j go what she said. Um, counselor Walker, what
She said.
I wanna thank you both for the presentation.
It was fantastic and thank you for taking a very dense topic
and, and making it, um, bite sized for the rest of us.
Um, I agree yes to all of the questions
and also wanna reiterate, I really like
that we're also looking at the heat island aspect
because I think that is a big looming issue for our city.
So thank you
Councillor Coleman.
Uh, it, uh, thank you very much, uh, and clear.
I still have, uh, wanted to hear
what Georgia had to say because it does affect zoning
and worst case scenario we a OI mean the
Atlantic morial overturning currents
could change everything.
So would we punt from
that spot if something like that happened?
Um, yes.
We fully expect that we are gonna be continuing
to do a lot of work on this.
And Julie had mentioned, for instance, the wave, uh,
component of this is something
that we wanna refine the modeling on.
Yeah. Anytime new information comes in,
we will be incorporating that.
If it deserves a response,
the council will get an opportunity to weigh in
and the council or the comprehensive plan requires us
to do it in that bank.
Are you sure? Thank you Councilor Matthews.
I'll give two thumb thumbs up.
I'm not really sure what Julie said.
She sounded like Charlie Brown's teacher tonight.
I'm just messing with you. Thank you both for,
uh, the presentation.
You know, I'm only messing with you, Julie,
even though you went 16 minutes and 32 seconds.
Uh, you both did a great job
and, uh, I, uh, yeah, I definitely will, uh, support it.
Councilor West Yes.
On all four questions
and thank you very much for the presentation
Councilor Pride.
Yeah, I agree. Um, thank you for the presentation.
I particularly like the, uh, navigating the cross summary
that really sort of crystallized it.
Um, and I think the scenarios are
appropriate and reasonable.
Um, and yeah, yes to all four.
Uh, thank you very much.
Um, I I will
just admit that I don't understand Question three,
an alternative compliance option.
What, what would that even look like?
Um, that was the scenario where we say
you wanna build 12 units, you need to build
and start those 12 units at 19 feet, right?
Yep. And the applicant says I can do that,
but I need a basement because I have a foundation.
Mm-hmm. And it's gonna freeze. Oh, okay.
I wanna see, I wanna put my utilities down there.
Can I waterproof the utilities that would, you're
Saying you're the council question.
The question to us is, should we be providing
these alternatives?
I thought that you were, nevermind.
I, it's late, I'm not under,
I said I didn't understand it and I was right.
So I am a yes to all four
and I really thank you for the presentation.
It was very interesting.
And um, I hope there will be ways for us
to maybe see it again.
I think we will see some
of it again when it comes back in ordinance form.
And then at that point,
since it will only be seven o'clock in the evening,
we may even have more questions and things to say.
So you have what you need. Thank you.
You have what you need. Thank you.
Um, we have one last part of our evening.
Can you take us through that please, Scott?
Or, or is it Councilor West who would present that? Yeah,
So it's a workshop, uh, request from Counselor West
for development of 35 Southeast Road for affordable housing.
And so yeah, typically the counselor will give their one
minute elevator pitch and need three others to,
or two others to, uh, proceed to the workshop list.
Uh, yeah, I do wanna just emphasize
that actually the term affordable is ambiguous here.
This is something that I've wanted to bring forward since
before I was elected.
But because of all the other things we've had going,
particularly the comprehensive plan I held off until now,
but I am really interested in trying to develop an approach
for, uh, home ownership opportunities for people
who are priced out of the South Portland market.
These are not low income people.
They are working people, uh, permit.
And I'm thinking in terms of our schools, our libraries,
our public safety facility people.
And, um, it's an approach that some of you're familiar
with the community housing trust
and I think that there's an approach that can, we can use
where we maintain title of the property.
I've been waiting, looking for a, a piece of property
that would be appropriate.
And when I realized that this 2.2 acres actually belongs
to the city, it seemed as though it was a good one to try
to take a look at and see if we could possibly, uh,
formulate a project that would,
that would work on this piece of property.
So that's a very preliminary thing,
but I hope we can at least have a discussion about it in
a, in a workshop setting.
Okay. Um, do, yes, I'll second
that second for that.
Sure. Walk It looks like,
looks like we all would love to have that workshop.
So, um, I think we have passed that workshop proposal.
Um, I'm already thinking of some interesting ideas
and potentially we've maybe hear from some developers
who have done this and we know who they are.
We'll find some. So anyway, thank you.
I think we can schedule that.
And then Scott, I think you were gonna read us a list.
Don't worry, I won't read the list.
I'll just say there are a number of items on your,
um, upcoming workshops.
There are two, uh, three items not yet ready
to be presented.
One that, um, will be pulled
and you'll get, uh, more information on why that is.
Uh, from the assistant city manager.
There are two other items.
Um, future use of willed fire station, update on pay
as you throw both ready to be added to a specific date, um,
if counsel so chooses.
But otherwise, uh,
no action really required to the council this evening.
Okay. Alright. Well I thank you for that.
And I think we need a motion to adjourn.
Oh, this well round robin could happen,
but I don't think anyone wants it to,
it's not on the agenda.
All right. Oh, agenda, right. Motion to adjourn. Thank you.
Somebody. I saw Councilor Walker seconded. Oh, 34th.
All in favor? Yes, we are done. Thank you.